
Page 1 of 24
<DOCUMENT> 
<TYPE>10-K 
<SEQUENCE>1 
<FILENAME>g6807.txt 
<TEXT> 
                                  UNITED STATES 
                       SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
                             WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549 
 
                                    FORM 10-K 
                ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF 
                       THE SECURUTIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 
                   For the fiscal year ended January 31, 2013 
 
                        Commission file number 333-180164 
 
                             American Oil & Gas Inc. 
             (Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in Its Charter) 
 
           Nevada                                                 99-0372611 
(State or Other Jurisdiction of                               (I.R.S. Employer 
 Incorporation or Organization)                              Identification No.) 
 
                          Suite 400 - 601 West Broadway 
                              Vancouver, BC V5Z 4C2 
                                 (888) 609-1173 
      (Address of Principal Executive Offices, Zip Code & Telephone Number) 
 
                            Resident Agents of Nevada 
                             711 S. Carson Street #4 
                              Carson City, NV 89701 
                Telephone (775)882-4641 Facsimile (775) 882-6818 
            (Name, Address and Telephone Number of Agent for Service) 
 
           Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: 
                                      None 
 
           Securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the Act: 
                         Common Stock, $0.001 par value 
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as 
defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes [ ] No [X] 
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports 
pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.Yes [ ] No [X] 
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required 
to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during 
the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was 
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing 
requirements for the past 90 days. Yes [X] No [ ] 
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and 
posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required 
to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (ss.232.405 of 
this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that 
the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes [X] No [ ] 
 
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 
of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the 
best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements 
incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this 
Form 10-K. [ ] 
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an 
accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See 
the definitions of "large accelerated filer," "accelerated filer" and "smaller 
reporting company" in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one): 
 
Large accelerated filer [ ]                        Accelerated filer [ ] 
Non-accelerated filer [ ]                          Smaller reporting company [X] 
(Do not check if a smaller reporting company) 
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in 
Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes [ ] No [X] 
 
As of May 16, 2013, the registrant had 20,000,000 shares of common stock 
issued and outstanding. No market value has been computed based upon the fact 
that no active trading market had been established. 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                                TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
                                                                        Page No. 
                                                                        -------- 
 
                                     Part I 
 
Item 1.  Business                                                            3
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 2 of 24
Item 1A. Risk Factors                                                       10 
Item 2.  Properties                                                         16 
Item 3.  Legal Proceedings                                                  16 
Item 4.  Mine Safety Disclosures                                            16 
 
                                     Part II 
 
Item 5.  Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder 
         Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities                  17 
Item 7.  Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition 
         and Results of Operations                                          19 
Item 8.  Financial Statements and Supplementary Data                        21 
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures                                            31 
 
                                    Part III 
 
Item 10. Directors and Executive Officers                                   33 
Item 11. Executive Compensation                                             34 
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management 
         and Related Stockholder Matters                                    35 
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions                     36 
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services                             36 
 
                                     Part IV 
 
Item 15. Exhibits                                                           37 
 
Signatures                                                                  38 
 
                                       2 
<PAGE> 
                                     PART I 
 
           CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION 
 
This report contains forward-looking statements that involve risk and 
uncertainties. We use words such as "anticipate", "believe", "plan", "expect", 
"future", "intend", and similar expressions to identify such forward-looking 
statements. Investors should be aware that all forward-looking statements 
contained within this filing are good faith estimates of management as of the 
date of this report and actual results may differ materially from historical 
results or our predictions of future results. 
 
ITEM 1. BUSINESS 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
 
We are an exploration stage company with no limited revenues and a short 
operating history. Our independent auditor has issued an audit opinion which 
includes a statement expressing substantial doubt as to our ability to continue 
as a going concern. 
 
We locate and lease existing wells for reactivation for the production of oil 
and gas that we will then sell, through an operator, to oil and gas brokers and 
gatherers. The gas sometimes may be sold directly to the public utility 
companies. 
 
We currently own a one hundred percent interest in a lease of forty acres 
located in Caddo Parrish, Louisiana, there is currently one drilled well bore, 
the Cecil Barlow #1, on the property. 
 
Our focus for the current fiscal year will be on developing our existing 
property, while continuing to pursue acquisition of additional leases and/or 
existing oil and gas wells which have potential for production, if revenues 
warrant. 
 
EMERGING GROWTH COMPANY STATUS UNDER THE JOBS ACT 
 
AO&G qualifies as an "emerging growth company" as defined in the Jumpstart our 
Business Startups Act (the "JOBS Act"). 
 
The JOBS Act creates a new category of issuers known as "emerging growth 
companies." Emerging growth companies are those with annual gross revenues of 
less than $1 billion (as indexed for inflation) during their most recently 
completed fiscal year. The JOBS Act is intended to facilitate public offerings 
by emerging growth companies by exempting them from several provisions of the 
Securities Act of 1933 and its regulations. An emerging growth company will 
retain that status until the earliest of: 
 
     *    The first fiscal year after its annual revenues exceed $1 billion; 
 
     *    The first fiscal year after the fifth anniversary of its IPO; 
 
     *    The date on which the company has issued more than $1 billion in 
          non-convertible debt during the previous three-year period; and 
 
     *    The first fiscal year in which the company has a public float of at 
          least $700 million. 
 
                                       3
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 3 of 24
<PAGE> 
FINANCIAL AND AUDIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies are subject to scaled financial 
disclosure requirements. Pursuant to these scaled requirements, emerging growth 
companies may: 
 
     *    Provide only two rather than three years of audited financial 
          statements in their IPO Registration Statement; 
 
     *    Provide selected financial data only for periods no earlier than those 
          included in the IPO Registration Statement in all SEC filings, rather 
          than the five years of selected financial data normally required; 
 
     *    Delay compliance with new or revised accounting standards until they 
          are made applicable to private companies; and 
 
     *    Be exempted from compliance with Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley 
          Act, which requires companies to receive an outside auditor's 
          attestation regarding the issuer's internal controls. 
 
OFFERING REQUIREMENTS 
 
In addition, during the IPO offering process, emerging growth companies are 
exempt from: 
 
     *    Restrictions on analyst research prior to and immediately after the 
          IPO, even from an investment bank that is underwriting the IPO; 
 
     *    Certain restrictions on communications to institutional investors 
          before filing the IPO registration statement; and 
 
     *    The requirement initially to publicly file IPO Registration 
          Statements. Emerging growth companies can confidentially file draft 
          Registration Statements and any amendments with the SEC. Public 
          filings of the draft documents must be made at least 21 days prior to 
          commencement of the IPO "road show." 
 
OTHER PUBLIC COMPANY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Emerging growth companies are also exempt from other ongoing obligations of most 
public companies, such as: 
 
     *    The requirements under Section 14(i) of the Exchange Act and Section 
          953(b)(1) of the Dodd-Frank Act to disclose executive compensation 
          information on pay-for-performance and the ratio of CEO to median 
          employee compensation; 
 
     *    Certain other executive compensation disclosure requirements, such as 
          the compensation discussion and analysis, under Item 402 of Regulation 
          S-K; and 
 
     *    The requirements under Sections 14A(a) and (b) of the Exchange Act to 
          hold advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute 
          payments. 
 
We received our initial funding of $10,000 through the sale of common stock to 
Robert Gelfand who purchased 10,000,000 shares of our common stock at $0.001 per 
share in January, 2012. On July 12, 2012, the Company completed its registered 
offering raising $50,000 from the sale of 10,000,000 shares of common stock. 
 
                                       4 
<PAGE> 
We have a total of 75,000,000 authorized common shares with a par value of 
$0.001 per share with 20,000,000 common shares issued and outstanding as of 
January 31, 2013. 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT OUR CURRENT LEASE 
 
ACQUISITION OF THE LEASE 
 
On February 2, 2012 the Company signed an assignment agreement with Four Star 
Oil Company of Oil City, Louisiana which transferred all the right title and 
interest in an oil, gas and mineral lease between The Cecil and Annie Lou Barlow 
Trust in favor of Four Star Oil Company recorded under Instrument No. 2026712, 
covering and affecting the property described as: SE 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of 
Section 6, Township 21 North, Range 15 West, Caddo Parish Louisiana. The 
consideration for the assignment was $10.00. Concurrent with the assignment 
agreement being signed the Company purchased for $10,000 the bore hole on the 
Cecil Barlow #1 well that is located in the lease executed between Four Star Oil 
Company and The Cecil and Annie Lou Barlow Trust. There are currently three 
additional orphaned wells on the property that if we are successful with the 
Cecil Barlow #1 well we could make application to secure the other wells for 
production. 
 
REQUIREMENTS OR CONDITIONS FOR RETENTION OF TITLE 
 
The Cecil Barlow #1 lease will remain in force as long as the well is in 
production. We are required to pay a 25% royalty on all revenue from the sale of 
the oil. The gatherer of the oil from the site will make the payments directly
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 4 of 24
to The Cecil and Annie Lou Barlow Trust and the operator prior to forwarding the 
remaining proceeds to the Company. 
 
LOCATION, ACCESS, CLIMATE, LOCAL RESOURCES & INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Location: The property is located in the Caddo Pine Island Field which lies in 
the northern part of Caddo Parish, Louisiana. The Caddo Pine Island Field is 
flanked to the west by Caddo Lake and to the east by the Red River. Latitude: 
32.89778, Longitude: -93.96389. The Cecil Barlow #1 well is located in the 40 
acres of property described as: SE1/4of the NE1/4of Section 6, Township 21 
North, Range 15 West, Caddo Parish Louisiana. 
 
Access: Easy access to the property is available via existing roadways in the 
area. The highway system in Caddo Parrish is vast and modern. The highway system 
in nearby Shreveport, the largest city in the area, consists of The Outer Loop 
Freeway Interstate 220 on the north and The Inner Loop Freeway, Louisiana 
Highway 3132 on the south, forming approximately an 8-mile diameter semi-loop 
around downtown. Another loop is formed by the Bert Kouns Industrial Loop, (LA 
Hwy 526) and circles further south bisecting Interstate 49. Interstate 49 is 
currently under constuction to extend to Hwy 549 in Arkansas. 
 
Shreveport lies along the route of the proposed Interstate 69 North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) superhighway that will link Canada, the U.S. 
industrial Midwest, Texas, and Mexico. 
 
Climate: The area has a humid subtropical climate. Rainfall is abundant, with 
the normal annual precipitation averaging nearly 47 inches, with monthly 
averages ranging from less than 3 inches in August to more than 5 inches in May. 
Severe thunderstorms with heavy rain, hail, damaging winds and tornadoes occur 
in the area during the spring and summer months. The winter months are normally 
mild, with an average of 35 days of freezing or below-freezing temperatures per 
year, with ice and sleet storms possible. Summer months are hot and humid, with 
 
                                       5 
<PAGE> 
maximum temperatures exceeding 90 degrees an average of 91 days per year, with 
high to very high relative average humidity, sometimes exceeding the 90 percent 
level. 
 
Local Resources & Infrastructure: The Town of Oil City, LA, located 3 miles from 
the property, offers some of the necessary infrastructure required to base and 
carry-out our proposed oil & gas program, (limited accommodations, 
communications, some equipment and supplies). The independent operator, Four 
Star Oil Company, who will carry out the rework and monthly maintenance on the 
well, is located in Oil City. Larger or specialized equipment can be acquired in 
the City of Shreveport, lying 25 miles to the south. 
 
HISTORY 
 
In 1906, the Caddo-Pine Island Field in northern Caddo Parish, Louisiana was 
discovered, and a rush of leasing and drilling activity ensued. In 1908, the 
first natural gas pipeline was constructed to transport gas from Caddo-Pine 
Island to Shreveport, Louisiana. This was one of the earliest commercial uses of 
natural gas, which was commonly viewed as an undesirable by-product of oil 
production and often "flared" or burnt off at the well site. 
 
Other innovations in the Caddo-Pine Island Field included the first over-water 
oil platform, which was constructed in the field on Caddo Lake in 1910. In that 
same year, a major oil pipeline was constructed from Caddo-Pine Island Field to 
a refinery built and operated by Standard Oil Company of Louisiana in Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana. The refinery continues to operate today. 
 
The Caddo-Pine Island field is located approximately 15 miles north of the City 
of Shreveport in Caddo Parish, La., and Marion County, Tex., which covers a 
portion of the Ark-La-Tex Area. The discovery well in the Caddo-Pine Island 
field was the Savage Bros. & Morrical No.1 Offenhauser, which was completed 
March 28, 1905, in the Annona Chalk at a depth of 1,556 ft. The well was located 
near Oil City, La. By the close of 1907 23 wells had been drilled -eight of 
which produced oil, 11 produced gas, and four were abandoned. Development of the 
field continued at a rapid pace during the following years, and by 1918 the 
production reached a peak of 11 million bbl/year. 
 
GEOLOGICAL SETTING 
 
The Caddo Pine Island Field sits on top of the Subine uplift, which is the 
stratigraphic uplift in Northern Louisiana. Due to the uplift many of the 
formations on the top of it became excellent reservoir rock for hydrocarbons. 
Impervious formations lying just above these called caprock cause traps that the 
oil and gas accumulate up against under pressure. When these caprock formations 
are drilled through and into the reservoir rock the pressure is then released 
and will flow to the surface carrying oil and gas with it. Production has been 
obtained from several horizons, ranging in depth from the Nacatoch sand at 800 
ft to the Hosston or Travis Peak which is found at 2,500 ft near the crest of 
the dome of the Lower Cretaceous beds. 
 
DISTRIBUTION METHODS 
 
We plan to distribute oil and gas that we produce through oil and gas gathering 
companies with the gas sometimes being sold directly to public utility 
companies. The operator, Four Star Oil Company, will make the arrangements with
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 5 of 24
the gathering companies. 
 
If we do find a gas well for lease the distribution agreements for gas generally 
provide for the company to tap into the distribution line of a gas distribution 
company, and we would be paid for our gas at the market price at the time of 
delivery less any transportation charge from the gas transmission company. These 
 
                                       6 
<PAGE> 
charges can range from 5% upward of the market value of the gas, depending on 
the competition among transmission companies in the area of the wells. 
 
COMPETITION 
 
We operate in a highly competitive environment for acquiring properties, 
modernizing existing wells and marketing oil and natural gas we may produce. The 
majority of our competitors possess and employ financial, technical and 
personnel resources substantially greater than ours, which can be particularly 
important in the areas in which we plan to operate. Those companies may be able 
to pay more for productive oil and natural gas properties and exploratory 
prospects and to evaluate, bid for and purchase a greater number of properties 
and prospects than our financial resources permit. Our ability to acquire 
additional prospects and to find and develop reserves in the future will depend 
on our ability to evaluate and select suitable properties and to consummate 
transactions in a highly competitive environment. Also, there is substantial 
competition for capital available for investment in the oil and natural gas 
industry. 
 
Current competitive factors in the domestic oil and gas industry are unique. The 
actual price range of crude oil is largely established by major international 
producers. Pricing for natural gas is more regional; however, more favorable 
prices can usually be negotiated for larger quantities of oil and/or gas 
product. In this respect, while we believe we have a price disadvantage when 
compared to larger producers, we view our primary pricing risk to be related to 
a potential decline in international prices to a level which could render our 
production uneconomical. 
 
We will be committed to use the services of the existing gathering companies in 
our present area of production. This potentially gives such gathering companies 
certain short-term relative monopolistic powers to set gathering and 
transportation costs, because obtaining the services of an alternative gathering 
company may require substantial additional costs. 
 
BANKRUPTCY OR SIMILAR PROCEEDINGS 
 
There has been no bankruptcy, receivership or similar proceeding. 
 
REORGANIZATIONS, PURCHASE OR SALE OF ASSETS 
 
There have been no material reclassifications, mergers, consolidations, or 
purchase or sale of a significant amount of assets not in the ordinary course of 
business. 
 
COMPLIANCE WITH GOVERNMENT REGULATION 
 
REGULATION OF TRANSPORTATION OF OIL 
 
Sales of crude oil, condensate and natural gas liquids are not currently 
regulated and are made at negotiated prices. Nevertheless, Congress could 
reenact price controls in the future. 
 
Our sales of crude oil will be affected by the availability, terms and cost of 
transportation. The transportation of oil in common carrier pipelines is also 
subject to rate regulation. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or the 
FERC, regulates interstate oil pipeline transportation rates under the 
Interstate Commerce Act. Intrastate oil pipeline transportation rates are 
subject to regulation by state regulatory commissions. The basis for intrastate 
oil pipeline regulation, and the degree of regulatory oversight and scrutiny 
given to intrastate oil pipeline rates, varies from state to state. 
 
                                       7 
<PAGE> 
Insofar as effective interstate and intrastate rates are equally applicable to 
all comparable shippers, we believe that the regulation of oil transportation 
rates will not affect our operations in any way that is of material difference 
from those of our competitors. Further, interstate and intrastate common carrier 
oil pipelines must provide service on a non-discriminatory basis. Under this 
open access standard, common carriers must offer service to all shippers 
requesting service on the same terms and under the same rates. When oil 
pipelines operate at full capacity, access is governed by pro-rationing 
provisions set forth in the pipelines' published tariffs. Accordingly, we 
believe that access to oil pipeline transportation services generally will be 
available to us to the same extent as to our competitors. 
 
REGULATION OF TRANSPORTATION AND SALE OF NATURAL GAS 
 
Historically, the transportation and sale for resale of natural gas in 
interstate commerce have been regulated pursuant to the Natural Gas Act of 1938, 
the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978 and regulations issued under those Acts by 
the FERC. In the past, the federal government has regulated the prices at which
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 6 of 24
natural gas could be sold. While sales by producers of natural gas can currently 
be made at uncontrolled market prices, Congress could reenact price controls in 
the future. 
 
Since 1985, the FERC has endeavored to make natural gas transportation more 
accessible to natural gas buyers and sellers on an open and non-discriminatory 
basis. The FERC has stated that open access policies are necessary to improve 
the competitive structure of the interstate natural gas pipeline industry and to 
create a regulatory framework that will put natural gas sellers into more direct 
contractual relations with natural gas buyers by, among other things, unbundling 
the sale of natural gas from the sale of transportation and storage services. 
Although the FERC's orders do not directly regulate natural gas producers, they 
are intended to foster increased competition within all phases of the natural 
gas industry. 
 
Intrastate natural gas transportation is subject to regulation by state 
regulatory agencies. The basis for intrastate regulation of natural gas 
transportation and the degree of regulatory oversight and scrutiny given to 
intrastate natural gas pipeline rates and services varies from state to state. 
Insofar as such regulation within a particular state will generally affect all 
intrastate natural gas shippers within the state on a comparable basis, we 
believe that the regulation of similarly situated intrastate natural gas 
transportation in any states in which we may eventually operate and ship natural 
gas on an intrastate basis will not affect our operations in any way that is of 
material difference from those of our competitors. 
 
REGULATION OF PRODUCTION 
 
The production of oil and natural gas is subject to regulation under a wide 
range of local, state and federal statutes, rules, orders and regulations. 
Federal, state and local statutes and regulations require permits for drilling 
operations, drilling bonds and reports concerning operations. All states, in 
which we may operate in the future, have regulations governing conservation 
matters, including provisions for the unitization or pooling of oil and natural 
gas properties, the establishment of maximum allowable rates of production from 
oil and natural gas wells, the regulation of well spacing, and plugging and 
abandonment of wells. The effect of these regulations is to limit the amount of 
oil and natural gas that can be produced from wells and to limit the number of 
wells or the locations, although companies can apply for exceptions to such 
regulations or to have reductions in well spacing. Moreover, each state 
generally imposes a production or severance tax with respect to the production 
and sale of oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids within its jurisdiction. 
 
                                       8 
<PAGE> 
The failure to comply with these rules and regulations can result in substantial 
penalties. Our competitors in the oil and natural gas industry are subject to 
the same regulatory requirements and restrictions that affect our operations. 
 
SOURCE AND AVAILABILITY OF RAW MATERIALS 
 
We have no significant raw materials. However, if we are successful in our plan 
of operations we may make use of numerous oil field service companies. We 
currently only have one well lease in Louisiana, where there are numerous oil 
field service companies. 
 
MAJOR CUSTOMERS 
 
If we are successful in our plan of operation, we will principally sell our oil 
and natural gas production through our operator to marketers and other 
purchasers that have access to nearby pipeline facilities. Generally, in areas 
where there is no practical access to pipelines, oil is trucked to storage 
facilities. We believe that the loss of any of these oil and gas purchasers 
would not materially impact our business, because we could readily find other 
purchasers for our oil and gas as produced. 
 
PATENTS, TRADEMARKS, FRANCHISES, ROYALTY AGREEMENTS OR LABOR CONTRACTS 
 
We have no patents, trademarks, licenses, concessions, or labor contracts. We 
will pay royalties to mineral owners and owners of overriding royalties on the 
oil and gas leases. These royalties usually are 25%, as is the case with the 
Cecil Barlow #1. The leases are good and royalties are owed as long as there is 
production on the property. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE AND RISKS 
 
Oil and natural gas exploration, development and production operations are 
subject to stringent federal, state and local laws and regulations governing the 
discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to 
environmental protection. Historically, most of the environmental regulation of 
oil and gas production has been left to state regulatory boards or agencies in 
those jurisdictions where there is significant gas and oil production, with 
limited direct regulation by such federal agencies as the Environmental 
Protection Agency. However, while we believe this generally to be the case for 
our production activities in Louisiana, there are various regulations issued by 
the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") and other governmental agencies that 
would govern significant spills, blow-outs, or uncontrolled emissions. 
 
In Louisiana, specific oil and gas regulations apply to the drilling, completion 
and operations of wells, and the disposal of waste oil and salt water. There are
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 7 of 24
also procedures incident to the plugging and abandonment of dry holes or other 
non-operational wells, all as governed by the applicable governing state agency. 
 
At the federal level, among the more significant laws and regulations that may 
affect our business and the oil and gas industry are: The Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, also known as 
"CERCLA" or Superfund; the Oil Pollution Act of 1990; the Resource Conservation 
and Recovery Act, also known as "RCRA"; the Clean Air Act; Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act of 1972, or the Clean Water Act; and the Safe Drinking 
Water Act of 1974. 
 
                                       9 
<PAGE> 
Compliance with these regulations may constitute a significant cost and effort 
for us. No specific accounting for environmental compliance has been projected 
by us at this time. We are not presently aware of any environmental demands, 
claims, or adverse actions, litigation or administrative proceedings in which 
our acquired property is involved or subject to, or arising out of any 
predecessor operations. 
 
In the event of a breach of environmental regulations, these environmental 
regulatory agencies have a broad range of alternative or cumulative remedies 
which include: ordering a clean-up of any spills or waste material and 
restoration of the soil or water to conditions existing prior to the 
environmental violation; fines; or enjoining further drilling, completion or 
production activities. In certain egregious situations the agencies may also 
pursue criminal remedies against us or our principal officers. 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT COSTS DURING THE LAST TWO YEARS 
 
We have not expended funds for research and development costs since inception. 
We paid $10,000 for the lease on our current property. 
 
EMPLOYEES AND EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
Our only employee is our sole officer, Robert Gelfand. Mr. Gelfand currently 
devotes 2-4 hours per week to company matters and after receiving funding he 
plans to devote as much time as the board of directors determines is necessary 
to manage the affairs of the company. There are no formal employment agreements 
between the company and our current employee. 
 
REPORTS TO SECURITY HOLDERS 
 
We voluntarily make available an annual report including audited financials on 
Form 10-K to security holders. We file the necessary reports with the SEC 
pursuant to the Exchange Act, including but not limited to, reports on Form 8-K 
as necessary, annual reports on Form 10-K, and quarterly reports on Form 10-Q. 
 
The public may read and copy any materials filed with the SEC at the SEC's 
Public Reference Room at 100 F Street NE, Washington, DC 20549. The public may 
obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the 
SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC maintains an Internet site that contains reports, 
proxy and information statements, and other electronic information regarding the 
Company and filed with the SEC at http://www.sec.gov. 
 
ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS 
 
RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH OUR COMPANY 
 
OUR AUDITORS HAVE ISSUED A GOING CONCERN OPINION, THEREFORE THERE IS SUBSTANTIAL 
UNCERTAINTY WE WILL CONTINUE ACTIVITIES IN WHICH CASE YOU COULD LOSE YOUR 
INVESTMENT. 
 
Our auditors have issued a going concern opinion. This means that there is 
substantial doubt that we can continue as an ongoing business for the next 
twelve months. As such we may have to cease activities and you could lose your 
investment. 
 
WE LACK AN OPERATING HISTORY AND HAVE LOSSES WHICH WE EXPECT TO CONTINUE INTO 
THE FUTURE. AS A RESULT, WE MAY HAVE TO SUSPEND OR CEASE ACTIVITIES. 
 
                                       10 
<PAGE> 
We were incorporated in January 2012 and we have not started our proposed 
business activities or realized any revenues. We have no operating history upon 
which an evaluation of our future success or failure can be made. Our net loss 
was $565 from inception to January 31, 2012. Our ability to achieve and maintain 
profitability and positive cash flow is dependent upon: 
 
     *    our ability to locate a profitable oil & gas property 
 
     *    our ability to generate revenues 
 
     *    our ability to reduce operating costs 
 
Based upon current plans, we expect to incur operating losses in future periods. 
This will happen because there are expenses associated with the research and 
reactivation of oil & gas properties. As a result, we may not generate revenues 
in the future. Failure to generate revenues may cause us to suspend or cease 
activities.
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 8 of 24
BECAUSE WE ARE SMALL AND DO NOT HAVE MUCH CAPITAL, WE MAY HAVE TO LIMIT OUR 
ACQUISITION ACTIVITY WHICH MAY RESULT IN A LOSS OF YOUR INVESTMENT. 
 
Because we are small and do not have much capital, we must limit our acquisition 
activity. As such we may not be able to lease as many properties as we would 
like. In that event, a profitable oil or gas reserve may go undiscovered. 
Without producing wells we cannot generate revenues and you will lose your 
investment. 
 
WE WILL BE RELIANT UPON AN OUTSIDE OPERATOR TO REWORK THE WELLS AND MONITOR THE 
DAY TO DAY OPERATION. IF THE OPERATOR FAILS TO CARRY OUT THE TERMS OF OUR 
AGREEMENT OR WE LOSE THE SERVICES OF THE OPERATOR OUR BUSINESS MAY FAIL. 
 
The re-working of our current well and monthly maintenance of the well once 
production commences will be carried out by an independent operator, Four Star 
Oil Company. We have an operating agreement in place with Four Star Oil Company, 
however their failure to live up to the terms of the agreement or an outright 
cancellation of the agreement could have an adverse effect on production and 
future revenues, consequently our operations, earnings and ultimate financial 
success may suffer irreparable harm as a result. 
 
BECAUSE OUR SOLE OFFICER AND/OR DIRECTOR DOES NOT HAVE ANY FORMAL TRAINING 
SPECIFIC TO THE TECHNICALITIES OF OIL AND GAS EXPLORATION, THERE IS A HIGHER 
RISK OUR BUSINESS WILL FAIL. 
 
Our sole officer and director is Robert Gelfand. Mr. Gelfand has no formal 
training as a geologist or in the technical aspects of management of an oil and 
gas company. His prior business experience has primarily been in venture capital 
for development and start-up stage companies. With no direct training or 
experience in these oil and gas industry, he may not be fully aware of the 
specific requirements related to working within this industry. His decisions and 
choices may not take into account standard engineering or managerial approaches 
oil and gas companies commonly use. Consequently, our operations, earnings, and 
ultimate financial success could suffer irreparable harm due to his lack of 
experience in this industry. 
 
BECAUSE OUR OFFICER AND DIRECTOR HAS OTHER OUTSIDE BUSINESS ACTIVITIES AND WILL 
ONLY BE DEVOTING 5 TO 10% OF HIS TIME OR APPROXIMATELY TWO TO FOUR HOURS PER 
WEEK TO OUR OPERATIONS, OUR OPERATIONS MAY BE SPORADIC WHICH MAY RESULT IN 
PERIODIC INTERRUPTIONS OR SUSPENSIONS OF EXPLORATION. 
 
Because our officer and director has other outside business activities and will 
only be devoting 5 to 10% of his time or two to four hours per week to our 
operations, our operations may be sporadic and occur at times which are 
 
                                       11 
<PAGE> 
convenient to our officer and director. As a result our business plan may be 
periodically interrupted or suspended. 
 
OUR DIRECTOR WILL CONTINUE TO EXERCISE SIGNIFICANT CONTROL OVER OUR OPERATIONS, 
WHICH MEANS AS A MINORITY STOCKHOLDER, YOU WOULD HAVE NO CONTROL OVER CERTAIN 
MATTERS REQUIRING STOCKHOLDER APPROVAL THAT COULD AFFECT YOUR ABILITY TO EVER 
RESELL ANY SHARES YOU PURCHASE. 
 
Our executive officer and director owns 50% of our common stock. He has 
significant influence in determining the outcome of all corporate transactions, 
including the election of directors, approval of significant corporate 
transactions, changes in control of the company or other matters that could 
affect your ability to ever resell your shares. His interests may differ from 
the interests of the other stockholders and thus result in corporate decisions 
that are disadvantageous to other stockholders. 
 
OUR SOLE OFFICER AND DIRECTOR LIVES OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES, MAKING IT 
DIFFICULT FOR AN INVESTOR TO ENFORCE LIABILITIES IN FOREIGN JURISDICTIONS. 
 
We are a Nevada corporation and, as such, are subject to the jurisdiction of the 
State of Nevada and the United States courts for purposes of any lawsuit, action 
or proceeding by investors herein. An investor would have the ability to effect 
service of process in any action on the company within the United States. 
However, since our officer and director resides outside the United States, 
substantially all or a portion of his assets are located outside the United 
States. As a result, it may not be possible for investors to effect service of 
process within the United States upon him or to enforce any judgments obtained 
in United States courts predicated upon the civil liability provisions of the 
federal securities laws of the United States or any state thereof. 
 
BECAUSE OUR SOLE OFFICER AND DIRECTOR LIVES IN VANCOUVER, CANADA, AND OUR 
CURRENT WELL IS IN CADDO PARRISH, LOUISIANA, THERE MAY BE A HIGHER RISK THAT OUR 
BUSINESS MAY FAIL. 
 
The distance from where our sole officer and director lives, and where the well 
operations are located, may create a detrimental situation due to lack of 
oversight. Though we have an operating agreement with Four Star Oil to monitor 
the well production, there is no assurance that it will be carried out properly 
without direct oversight by our officer and director. This could have an adverse 
effect on production and future revenues, consequently our operations, earnings 
and ultimate financial success may suffer irreparable harm as a result.
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 9 of 24
RISKS RELATING TO THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS INDUSTRY AND OUR BUSINESS 
 
A SUBSTANTIAL OR EXTENDED DECLINE IN OIL AND NATURAL GAS PRICES MAY ADVERSELY 
AFFECT OUR BUSINESS, FINANCIAL CONDITION OR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND OUR 
ABILITY TO MEET OUR CAPITAL EXPENDITURE OBLIGATIONS AND FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS. 
 
The prices we may receive in the future for our oil and natural gas production 
will heavily influence our revenue, profitability, access to capital and future 
rate of growth. Oil and natural gas are commodities and, therefore, their prices 
are subject to wide fluctuations in response to relatively minor changes in 
supply and demand. Historically, the markets for oil and natural gas have been 
volatile. These markets will likely continue to be volatile in the future. The 
prices we may receive for any future production, and the levels of the 
production, depend on numerous factors beyond our control. These factors 
include, but are not limited to, the following: 
 
                                       12 
<PAGE> 
     *    changes in global supply and demand for oil and natural gas; 
 
     *    the actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, or 
          OPEC; 
 
     *    the price and quantity of imports of foreign oil and natural gas; 
 
     *    political conditions, including embargoes, in or affecting other 
          oil-producing activity; 
 
     *    the level of global oil and natural gas exploration and production 
          activity; 
 
     *    the level of global oil and natural gas inventories; 
 
     *    weather conditions; 
 
     *    technological advances affecting energy consumption; and 
 
     *    the price and availability of alternative fuels. 
 
Lower oil and natural gas prices may not only decrease any prospective revenues 
on a per share basis but also may reduce the amount of oil and natural gas that 
we may be able to produce economically. Lower prices will also negatively impact 
the value of a proven reserve when and if we are able to find them. A 
substantial or extended decline in oil or natural gas prices may materially and 
adversely affect our future business, financial condition, results of 
operations, liquidity or ability to finance planned capital expenditures. 
 
PRODUCTION OF OIL AND NATURAL GAS ARE HIGH RISK ACTIVITIES WITH MANY 
UNCERTAINTIES THAT COULD ADVERSELY AFFECT OUR BUSINESS, FINANCIAL CONDITION OR 
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS. 
 
Our future success will depend on the success of exploitation, development and 
production activities. Oil and natural gas production activities are subject to 
numerous risks beyond our control, including the risk that an existing well will 
not result in commercially viable oil or natural gas production. Our decisions 
to lease, develop or otherwise exploit prospects or properties will depend in 
part on the evaluation of data obtained through geophysical and geological 
analyses, production data and engineering studies, the results of which are 
often inconclusive or subject to varying interpretations. 
 
IF OUR ASSESSMENT OF OUR LEASED PROPERTY, OR ANY FUTURE LEASED PROPERTIES, IS 
MATERIALLY INACCURATE, IT COULD HAVE SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON FUTURE OPERATIONS AND 
EARNINGS. 
 
The successful acquisition of producing properties requires assessments of many 
factors, which are inherently inexact and may be inaccurate, including the 
following: 
 
     *    the amount of recoverable reserves; 
 
     *    future oil and natural gas prices; 
 
     *    estimates of operating costs; 
 
     *    estimates of future development costs; 
 
                                       13 
<PAGE> 
     *    estimates of the costs and timing of plugging and abandonment; and 
 
     *    potential environmental and other liabilities. 
 
Our assessment will not reveal all existing or potential problems, nor will it 
permit us to become familiar enough with the properties to assess fully their 
capabilities and deficiencies. 
 
IF OIL AND NATURAL GAS PRICES DECREASE, WE MAY BE REQUIRED TO TAKE WRITE-DOWNS 
OF THE CARRYING VALUE OF OUR OIL AND NATURAL GAS PROPERTY, POTENTIALLY 
NEGATIVELY IMPACTING THE TRADING VALUE OF OUR SECURITIES.
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 10 of 24
Accounting rules require that we review periodically the carrying value of our 
oil and natural gas property for possible impairment. Based on specific market 
factors and circumstances at the time of prospective impairment reviews, and the 
continuing evaluation of development plans, production data, economics and other 
factors, we may be required to write down the carrying value of our oil and 
natural gas property. A write-down could constitute a non-cash charge to 
earnings. It is likely the cumulative effect of a write-down could also 
negatively impact the trading price of our securities. 
 
RESERVE ESTIMATES DEPEND ON MANY ASSUMPTIONS THAT MAY TURN OUT TO BE INACCURATE. 
ANY MATERIAL INACCURACIES IN THESE RESERVE ESTIMATES OR UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS 
WILL MATERIALLY AFFECT THE QUANTITIES AND PRESENT VALUE OF OUR RESERVES. 
 
The process of estimating oil and natural gas reserves is complex. It requires 
interpretations of available technical data and many assumptions, including 
assumptions relating to economic factors. Any significant inaccuracies in these 
interpretations or assumptions could materially affect the estimated quantities 
and present value of our reported reserves. The process also requires economic 
assumptions about matters such as oil and natural gas prices, operating 
expenses, capital expenditures, taxes and availability of funds. Therefore, 
estimates of oil and natural gas reserves are inherently imprecise. All of these 
factors would have a negative impact on earnings and net income, and most likely 
the trading price of our securities. 
 
WE MAY INCUR SUBSTANTIAL LOSSES AND BE SUBJECT TO SUBSTANTIAL LIABILITY CLAIMS 
AS A RESULT OF OUR OIL AND NATURAL GAS OPERATIONS. 
 
We do not currently have insurance for possible risks. Losses and liabilities 
arising from uninsured events could materially and adversely affect our 
business, financial condition or results of operations. The oil and natural gas 
production activities will be subject to all of the operating risks associated 
with the production of oil and natural gas, including the possibility of: 
 
     *    environmental hazards, such as uncontrollable flows of oil, natural 
          gas, brine, well fluids, toxic gas or other pollution into the 
          environment, including groundwater and shoreline contamination; 
 
     *    abnormally pressured formations; 
 
     *    mechanical difficulties; 
 
     *    fires and explosions; 
 
     *    personal injuries and death; and 
 
     *    natural disasters. 
 
                                       14 
<PAGE> 
Any of these risks could adversely affect our ability to conduct operations or 
result in substantial losses to our company. We may elect not to obtain 
insurance if we believe that the cost of available insurance is excessive 
relative to the risks presented. In addition, pollution and environmental risks 
generally are not fully insurable. If a significant accident or other event 
occurs and is not fully covered by insurance, then it could adversely affect us. 
 
OUR OPERATIONS MAY INCUR SUBSTANTIAL LIABILITIES TO COMPLY WITH THE 
ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS. 
 
Oil and natural gas operations are subject to stringent federal, state and local 
laws and regulations relating to the release or disposal of materials into the 
environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection. These laws and 
regulations may require the acquisition of a permit before production commences, 
restrict the types, quantities and concentration of substances that can be 
released into the environment in connection with production activities, limit or 
prohibit activities on certain lands lying within wilderness, wetlands and other 
protected areas, and impose substantial liabilities for pollution resulting from 
our operations. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations may result in 
the assessment of administrative, civil and criminal penalties, incurrence of 
investigatory or remedial obligations or the imposition of injunctive relief. 
Changes in environmental laws and regulations occur frequently, and any changes 
that result in more stringent or costly waste handling, storage, transport, 
disposal or cleanup requirements could require us to make significant 
expenditures to maintain compliance, and may otherwise have a material adverse 
effect on our results of operations, competitive position or financial condition 
as well as the industry in general. Under these environmental laws and 
regulations, we could be held strictly liable for the removal or remediation of 
previously released materials or property contamination regardless of whether we 
were responsible for the release or if our operations were standard in the 
industry at the time they were performed. 
 
UNLESS WE REPLACE OUR OIL AND NATURAL GAS RESERVES, OUR RESERVES AND PRODUCTION 
WILL DECLINE, WHICH WOULD ADVERSELY AFFECT OUR CASH FLOWS AND INCOME. 
 
Unless we conduct successful development and exploitation activities or acquire 
properties containing proved reserves, our proved reserves when we find them 
will decline as those reserves are produced. Producing oil and natural gas 
reservoirs generally are characterized by declining production rates that vary 
depending upon reservoir characteristics and other factors. Our future oil and 
natural gas reserves and production, and, therefore our cash flow and income,
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 11 of 24
are highly dependent on our success in efficiently developing and exploiting our 
current reserves and economically finding or acquiring additional recoverable 
reserves. If we are unable to develop, exploit, find or acquire additional 
reserves to replace our current and future production, our cash flow and income 
will decline as production declines, until our existing property would be 
incapable of sustaining commercial production. 
 
IF ACCESS TO MARKETS IS RESTRICTED, IT COULD NEGATIVELY IMPACT OUR PRODUCTION, 
OUR INCOME AND ULTIMATELY OUR ABILITY TO RETAIN OUR LEASE AND ANY FUTURE LEASES. 
 
Market conditions or the unavailability of satisfactory oil and natural gas 
gathering arrangements may hinder access to oil and natural gas markets or delay 
production. The availability of a ready market for our oil and natural gas 
production depends on a number of factors, including the demand for and supply 
of oil and natural gas and the proximity of reserves to pipelines and terminal 
facilities. The ability to market production depends in substantial part on the 
 
                                       15 
<PAGE> 
availability and capacity of gathering systems, pipelines and processing 
facilities owned and operated by third parties. Our failure to obtain such 
services on acceptable terms could materially harm our business. 
 
COMPETITION IN THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS INDUSTRY IS INTENSE, WHICH MAY ADVERSELY 
AFFECT OUR ABILITY TO COMPETE. 
 
We will operate in a highly competitive environment. Our competitors possess and 
employ financial, technical and personnel resources substantially greater than 
ours, which can be particularly important in the areas in which we operate. 
Those companies may be able to pay more for productive oil and natural gas 
properties and exploratory prospects and to evaluate, bid for and purchase a 
greater number of properties and prospects than our financial resources permit. 
Our ability to acquire additional prospects and to find and develop reserves in 
the future will depend on our ability to evaluate and select suitable properties 
and to consummate transactions in a highly competitive environment. We may not 
be able to compete successfully. 
 
ITEM 2. PROPERTIES 
 
We do not currently own any property. The Company leases shared office 
facilities at Suite 400 - 601 West Broadway, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4C2 on a 
month-to-month basis for approximately $50 per month. The facilities include 
answering services, fax services, reception area and shared office and meeting 
facilities as well as secretarial services which are available on a pay as 
needed basis. The telephone number is (888)609-1173. Management believes the 
current premises are sufficient for its needs at this time. 
 
We currently have no investment policies as they pertain to real estate, real 
estate interests or real estate mortgages. 
 
ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
 
We are not currently involved in any legal proceedings nor do we have any 
knowledge of any threatened litigation. 
 
ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES 
 
None. 
 
                                       16 
<PAGE> 
                                     PART II 
 
ITEM 5. MARKET FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS 
 
As of January 31, 2013, we had 10,000,000 shares of $0.0001 par value common 
stock issued and outstanding held by 27 shareholders of record. 
 
Our common stock is currently listed on the OTCBB under the symbol "AOIX". The 
OTCBB is a regulated quotation service that displays real-time quotes, last sale 
prices and volume information in over-the-counter (OTC) securities. The OTCBB is 
not an issuer listing service, market or exchange. Although the OTCBB does not 
have any listing requirements per se, to be eligible for quotation on the OTCBB, 
issuers must remain current in their filings with the U.S. Securities and 
Exchange Commission or applicable regulatory authority. Market Makers are not 
permitted to begin quotation of a security whose issuer does not meet this 
filing requirement. Securities already quoted on the OTCBB that become 
delinquent in their required filings will be removed following a 30 or 60 day 
grace period if they do not make their required filing during that time. 
 
There has been no active trading of our securities, and, therefore, no high and 
low bid pricing. We have paid no cash dividends and have no outstanding options. 
 
PENNY STOCK RULES 
 
The Securities and Exchange Commission has also adopted rules that regulate 
broker-dealer practices in connection with transactions in penny stocks. Penny 
stocks are generally equity securities with a price of less than $5.00 (other 
than securities registered on certain national securities exchanges or quoted on 
the Nasdaq system, provided that current price and volume information with
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 12 of 24
respect to transactions in such securities is provided by the exchange or 
system). 
 
A purchaser is purchasing penny stock which limits the ability to sell the 
stock. Our shares will remain penny stocks for the foreseeable future. The 
classification of penny stock makes it more difficult for a broker-dealer to 
sell the stock into a secondary market, which makes it more difficult for a 
purchaser to liquidate his/her investment. Any broker-dealer engaged by the 
purchaser for the purpose of selling his or her shares in us will be subject to 
Rules 15g-1 through 15g-10 of the Securities and Exchange Act. Rather than 
creating a need to comply with those rules, some broker-dealers will refuse to 
attempt to sell penny stock. 
 
The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior to a transaction in a penny 
stock not otherwise exempt from those rules, to deliver a standardized risk 
disclosure document, which: 
 
     -    contains a description of the nature and level of risk in the market 
          for penny stock in both public offerings and secondary trading; 
 
     -    contains a description of the broker's or dealer's duties to the 
          customer and of the rights and remedies available to the customer with 
          respect to a violation of such duties or other requirements of the 
          Securities Act of 1934, as amended; 
 
     -    contains a brief, clear, narrative description of a dealer market, 
          including "bid" and "ask" price for the penny stock and the 
          significance of the spread between the bid and ask price; 
 
     -    contains a toll-free telephone number for inquiries on disciplinary 
          actions; 
 
                                       17 
<PAGE> 
     -    defines significant terms in the disclosure document or in the conduct 
          of trading penny stocks; and 
 
     -    contains such other information and is in such form (including 
          language, type, size and format) as the Securities and Exchange 
          Commission shall require by rule or regulation; 
 
The broker-dealer also must provide, prior to effecting any transaction in a 
penny stock, to the customer: 
 
     -    the bid and offer quotations for the penny stock; 
 
     -    the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the 
          transaction; 
 
     -    the number of shares to which such bid and ask prices apply, or other 
          comparable information relating to the depth and liquidity of the 
          market for such stock; and 
 
     -    monthly account statements showing the market value of each penny 
          stock held in the customer's account. 
 
In addition, the penny stock rules require that prior to a transaction in a 
penny stock not otherwise exempt from those rules; the broker-dealer must make a 
special written determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for 
the purchaser and receive the purchaser's written acknowledgment of the receipt 
of a risk disclosure statement, a written agreement to transactions involving 
penny stocks, and a signed and dated copy of a written suitability statement. 
These disclosure requirements will have the effect of reducing the trading 
activity in the secondary market for our stock because it will be subject to 
these penny stock rules. Therefore, stockholders may have difficulty selling 
their securities. 
 
DIVIDENDS 
 
We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock. For the 
foreseeable future, we intend to retain any earnings to finance the development 
and expansion of our business, and we do not anticipate paying any cash 
dividends on our common stock. Any future determination to pay dividends will be 
at the discretion of the Board of Directors and will be dependent upon then 
existing conditions, including our financial condition and results of 
operations, capital requirements, contractual restrictions, business prospects, 
and other factors that the board of directors considers relevant. 
 
SECTION RULE 15(g) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
 
The Company's shares are covered by Section 15(g) of the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934, as amended that imposes additional sales practice requirements on 
broker/dealers who sell such securities to persons other than established 
customers and accredited investors (generally institutions with assets in excess 
of $5,000,000 or individuals with net worth in excess of $1,000,000 or annual 
income exceeding $200,000 or $300,000 jointly with their spouses). For 
transactions covered by the Rule, the broker/dealer must make a special 
suitability determination for the purchase and have received the purchaser's 
written agreement to the transaction prior to the sale. Consequently, the Rule 
may affect the ability of broker/dealers to sell our securities and also may
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 13 of 24
affect your ability to sell your shares in the secondary market. 
 
                                       18 
<PAGE> 
Section 15(g) also imposes additional sales practice requirements on 
broker/dealers who sell penny securities. These rules require a one page summary 
of certain essential items. The items include the risk of investing in penny 
stocks in both public offerings and secondary marketing; terms important to in 
understanding of the function of the penny stock market, such as "bid" and 
"offer" quotes, a dealers "spread" and broker/dealer compensation; the 
broker/dealer compensation, the broker/dealers duties to its customers, 
including the disclosures required by any other penny stock disclosure rules; 
the customers rights and remedies in causes of fraud in penny stock 
transactions; and, FINRA's toll free telephone number and the central number of 
the North American Administrators Association, for information on the 
disciplinary history of broker/dealers and their associated persons. 
 
SECURITIES AUTHORIZED FOR ISSUANCE UNDER EQUITY COMPENSATION PLANS 
 
We do not have any equity compensation plans and accordingly we have no 
securities authorized for issuance there under. 
 
PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES BY THE ISSUER AND AFFILIATED PURCHASERS 
 
We did not purchase any of our shares of common stock or other securities during 
the year ended January 31, 2013. 
 
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS 
        OF OPERATIONS 
 
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 
 
We are an exploration stage company and have generated $2,951 in revenues since 
inception (January 23, 2012) and have incurred $22,200 in expenses through 
January 31, 2013. For the years ended January 31, 2013 and 2012 we incurred 
$21,635 and $565, respectively, in general and administrative expenses and 
professional fees. 
 
The following table provides selected financial data about our company for the 
years ended January 31, 2013 and 2012. 
 
             Balance Sheet Data:           1/31/13          1/31/12 
             -------------------           -------          ------- 
 
             Cash                          $10,117          $25,000 
             Total assets                  $45,551          $25,000 
             Total liabilities             $ 4,800          $15,565 
             Shareholders' equity          $40,751          $ 9,435 
 
Cash provided by financing activities since inception through January 31, 2013 
was $10,000 from the sale of 10,000,000 shares of common stock to our officer 
and director in January 2012. 
 
On July 12, 2012, we completed our offering pursuant to a Registration Statement 
on Form S-1, selling 10,000,000 shares of common stock to 27 individuals for 
cash in the amount of $0.005 per share, for total proceeds of $50,000. 
 
                                       19 
<PAGE> 
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES 
 
Our cash balance at January 31, 2013 was $10,117, $187 in accounts receivable 
and $4,800 in accounts payable. If we experience a shortage of funds in the next 
twelve months we may utilize funds from our director, who has agreed to advance 
funds for operations, however he has no formal commitment, arrangement or legal 
obligation to advance or loan funds to us. 
 
PLAN OF OPERATION 
 
Our current cash balance is $10,117. We believe our cash balance along with 
anticipated revenues from the reworked well will be sufficient to cover the 
expenses we will incur during the next twelve months. In order to achieve our 
business plan goals, we will need to continue to realize revenue from our oil & 
gas sales. We are an exploration stage company and have generated $2,951 revenue 
to date. We have sold $60,000 in equity securities to pay for our start-up 
operations. 
 
Our auditor has issued a going concern opinion. This means that there is 
substantial doubt that we can continue as an on-going business for the next 
twelve months unless we generate sufficient revenues from our oil & gas sales. 
There is no assurance we will ever reach that point. In the meantime the 
continuation of the Company is dependent upon the continued financial support 
from our shareholders, our ability to obtain necessary equity financing to 
continue operations and the attainment of profitable operations. 
 
During the year ended January 31, 2013 we spent $10,000 for the purchase of the 
Cecil Barlow #1 bore hole and $27,102 to complete the re-work and production 
program. 
 
Our plan of operation for the next twelve months is to continue production on
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 14 of 24
the current lease while also searching for other appropriate leases. We 
anticipate spending an additional $3,875 (approx. $387.50 per month) for monthly 
maintenance fees, $10,000 on professional fees, including fees payable for 
complying with reporting obligations, $5,000 in general administrative costs and 
$1,125 in working capital. Total expenditures over the next 12 months are 
therefore expected to be approximately $20,000. 
 
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS 
 
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements. 
 
GOING CONCERN 
 
Our auditor has issued a going concern opinion. This means that there is 
substantial doubt that we can continue as an on-going business for the next 
twelve months unless we obtain additional capital to pay our bills. This is 
because we have not generated revenues and no revenues are anticipated until we 
begin extracting minerals, if they are found. There is no assurance we will ever 
reach that point. 
 
                                       20 
<PAGE> 
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
 
                               GEORGE STEWART, CPA 
                              316 17TH AVENUE SOUTH 
                            SEATTLE, WASHINGTON 98144 
                        (206) 328-8554 FAX(206) 328-0383 
 
 
             REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM 
 
To the Board of Directors 
American Oil & Gas Inc. 
 
I have audited the  accompanying  balance  sheets of American Oil & Gas Inc. (An 
Exploration  Stage  Company) as of January  31,  2013 and 2012,  and the related 
statements  of  operations,  stockholders'  equity  and cash flows for the years 
ended  January  31,  2013 and 2012 and for the  period  from  January  23,  2012 
(inception),   to  January  31,  2013.   These  financial   statements  are  the 
responsibility of the Company's  management.  My responsibility is to express an 
opinion on these financial statements based on my audit. 
 
I conducted my audit in  accordance  with the  standards  of the Public  Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (United States).  Those standards require that I plan 
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial 
statements are free of material misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a 
test basis,  evidence  supporting  the amounts and  disclosures in the financial 
statements.  An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and 
significant  estimates  made by  management,  as well as evaluating  the overall 
financial statement presentation.  I believe that my audit provides a reasonable 
basis for my opinion. 
 
In my opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all 
material  respects,  the  financial  position  of American  Oil & Gas Inc.,  (An 
Exploration  Stage  Company) as of January 31, 2013 and 2012, and the results of 
its  operations and cash flows for the years ended January 31, 2013 and 2012 and 
the period from January 23, 2012 (inception),  to January 31, 2013 in conformity 
with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. 
 
The accompanying  financial  statements have been prepared  assuming the Company 
will  continue as a going  concern.  As discussed  in Note # 4 to the  financial 
statements,  the Company has had no operations and has no established  source of 
revenue.  This raises substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going 
concern.  Management's plan in regard to these matters is also described in Note 
# 4. The financial  statements do not include any adjustments  that might result 
from the outcome of this uncertainty. 
 
 
/s/ George Stewart 
-------------------------------- 
George Stewart 
Seattle, Washington 
April 29, 2013 
 
 
                                       21 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                         (An Exploration Stage Company) 
                                  Balance Sheet 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
<TABLE> 
<CAPTION> 
                                                                        As of                 As of 
                                                                   January 31, 2013      January 31, 2012 
                                                                   ----------------      ---------------- 
<S>                                                                 <C>                   <C> 
                                     ASSETS
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 15 of 24
CURRENT ASSETS 
  Cash                                                                 $ 10,117              $ 25,000 
  Accounts Receivable                                                       187                    -- 
                                                                       --------              -------- 
      TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS                                               10,304                25,000 
 
OIL AND GAS PROPERTY (SUCCESSFUL EFFORTS METHOD) 
  Unproven                                                               37,102                    -- 
  Accumulated Depletion                                                  (1,855)                   -- 
                                                                       --------              -------- 
      TOTAL OIL AND GAS PROPERTY                                         35,247                    -- 
                                                                       --------              -------- 
 
      TOTAL ASSETS                                                     $ 45,551              $ 25,000 
                                                                       ========              ======== 
 
                       LIABILITIES & STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY 
 
CURRENT LIABILITIES 
  Accounts Payable                                                     $  4,800              $    565 
  Loan Payable - Related Party                                               --                15,000 
                                                                       --------              -------- 
      TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES                                           4,800                15,565 
 
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY 
  Common stock, ($0.001 par value, 75,000,000 shares authorized; 
   20,000,000 and 10,000,000 shares issued and outstanding 
   as of January 31, 2013 and January 31, 2012                         $ 20,000              $ 10,000 
  Additional Paid-In Capital                                             40,000                    -- 
  Deficit accumulated during exploration stage                          (19,249)                 (565) 
                                                                       --------              -------- 
      TOTAL STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY                                         40,751                 9,435 
                                                                       --------              -------- 
 
      TOTAL LIABILITIES & STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY                         $ 45,551              $ 25,000 
                                                                       ========              ======== 
</TABLE> 
 
 
                        See Notes to Financial Statements 
 
                                       22 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                         (An Exploration Stage Company) 
                             Statement of Operations 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
<TABLE> 
<CAPTION> 
                                                                              January 23, 2012 
                                                                                (inception) 
                                   Year ended             Year ended              through 
                                January 31, 2013       January 31, 2012       January 31, 2013 
                                ----------------       ----------------       ---------------- 
<S>                             <C>                    <C>                    <C> 
REVENUES 
  Oil and Gas                     $      2,951           $         --           $      2,951 
                                  ------------           ------------           ------------ 
      TOTAL REVENUES                     2,951                     --                  2,951 
 
EXPENSES 
  Operating Expenses                     2,763                     --                  2,763 
  General and Administration             8,016                    565                  8,581 
  Depletion                              1,855                     --                  1,855 
  Professional Fees                      9,000                     --                  9,000 
                                  ------------           ------------           ------------ 
      TOTAL EXPENSES                    21,635                    565                 22,200 
                                  ------------           ------------           ------------ 
 
NET INCOME (LOSS)                 $    (18,684)          $       (565)          $    (19,249) 
                                  ============           ============           ============ 
NET LOSS PER BASIC AND 
 DILITED SHARE                    $      (0.00)          $      (0.00) 
                                  ============           ============ 
WEIGHTED AVERAGE NUMBER OF 
 COMMON SHARES OUTSTANDING          15,573,770             10,000,000 
                                  ============           ============ 
</TABLE> 
 
 
                        See Notes to Financial Statements 
 
                                       23 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                         (An Exploration Stage Company) 
                  Statement of Changes in Stockholders' Equity 
           From January 23, 2012 (Inception) through January 31, 2013
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 16 of 24
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
<TABLE> 
<CAPTION> 
                                                                                         Deficit 
                                                                                       Accumulated 
                                                           Common       Additional       During 
                                             Common         Stock         Paid-in      Exploration 
                                              Stock         Amount        Capital         Stage          Total 
                                              -----         ------        -------         -----          ----- 
<S>                                          <C>            <C>           <C>             <C>           <C> 
BALANCE, JANUARY 23, 2012                           --    $       --     $       --     $       --     $       -- 
 
Stock issued for cash on January 23, 2012 
 @ $0.001 per share                         10,000,000        10,000             --             --         10,000 
 
Net loss,  January 31, 2012                                                                   (565)          (565) 
                                            ----------    ----------     ----------     ----------     ---------- 
 
BALANCE, JANUARY 31, 2012                   10,000,000        10,000             --           (565)         9,435 
                                            ==========    ==========     ==========     ==========     ========== 
 
Stock issued for cash on July 12, 2012 
 @ $0.005 per share                         10,000,000        10,000         40,000             --         50,000 
 
Net loss, January 31, 2013                                                                 (18,684)       (18,684) 
                                            ----------    ----------     ----------     ----------     ---------- 
 
BALANCE, JANUARY 31, 2013                   20,000,000    $   20,000     $   40,000      $ (19,249)    $   40,751 
                                            ==========    ==========     ==========     ==========     ========== 
</TABLE> 
 
 
                        See Notes to Financial Statements 
 
                                       24 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                         (An Exploration Stage Company) 
                             Statement of Cash Flows 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
<TABLE> 
<CAPTION> 
                                                                                                       January 23, 2012 
                                                                                                         (inception) 
                                                                Year ended           Year ended            through 
                                                             January 31, 2013     January 31, 2012     January 31, 2013 
                                                             ----------------     ----------------     ---------------- 
<S>                                                          <C>                  <C>                  <C> 
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES 
  Net income (loss)                                              $(18,684)            $   (565)            $(19,249) 
  Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash 
   provided by (used in) operating activities: 
 
  Changes in operating assets and liabilities: 
    Depletion                                                       1,855                   --                1,855 
    Accounts Receivable                                              (187)                  --                 (187) 
    Accounts Payable                                                4,235                  565                4,800 
                                                                 --------             --------             -------- 
          NET CASH PROVIDED BY (USED IN) OPERATING ACTIVITIES     (12,781)                  --              (12,781) 
 
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES 
  Oil and Gas Property                                            (37,102)                  --              (37,102) 
                                                                 --------             --------             -------- 
          NET CASH PROVIDED BY (USED IN) INVESTING ACTIVITIES     (37,102)                  --              (37,102) 
 
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES 
  Loan Payable - Related Party                                    (15,000)              15,000                   -- 
  Issuance of common stock                                         50,000               10,000               60,000 
                                                                 --------             --------             -------- 
          NET CASH PROVIDED BY (USED IN) FINANCING ACTIVITIES      35,000               25,000               60,000 
                                                                 --------             --------             -------- 
 
NET INCREASE (DECREASE) IN CASH                                   (14,883)              25,000               10,117 
 
CASH AT BEGINNING OF PERIOD                                        25,000                   --                   -- 
                                                                 --------             --------             -------- 
 
CASH AT END OF PERIOD                                            $ 10,117             $ 25,000             $ 10,117 
                                                                 ========             ========             ======== 
 
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURES OF CASH FLOW INFORMATION 
 
Cash paid during year for: 
  Interest                                                       $     --             $     --             $     -- 
                                                                 ========             ========             ======== 
 
  Income Taxes                                                   $     --             $     --             $     -- 
                                                                 ========             ========             ========
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 17 of 24
</TABLE> 
 
 
                        See Notes to Financial Statements 
 
                                       25 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                         (An Exploration Stage Company) 
                          Notes to Financial Statements 
                                January 31, 2013 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
NOTE 1. ORGANIZATION AND DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS 
 
American Oil and Gas Inc. (the Company) was  incorporated  under the laws of the 
State of Nevada on January  23,  2012.  The  Company was formed to engage in the 
acquisition, exploration and development of oil and gas properties. 
 
The Company is in the exploration stage. The Company currently operates a single 
well. The Company has not commenced any exploration activities. 
 
NOTE 2. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
 
BASIS OF ACCOUNTING 
 
The Company's  financial  statements  are prepared  using the accrual  method of 
accounting. The Company has elected a January 31, year-end. 
 
BASIC EARNINGS (LOSS) PER SHARE 
 
ASC No. 260, "Earnings Per Share",  specifies the computation,  presentation and 
disclosure requirements for earnings (loss) per share for entities with publicly 
held common stock. The Company has adopted the provisions of ASC No. 260. 
 
Basic net  earnings  (loss) per share  amounts is computed  by dividing  the net 
earnings  (loss) by the weighted  average  number of common shares  outstanding. 
Diluted  earnings  (loss)  per share are the same as basic  earnings  (loss) per 
share due to the lack of dilutive items in the Company. 
 
CASH EQUIVALENTS 
 
The Company considers all highly liquid  investments  purchased with an original 
maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. 
 
USE OF ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS 
 
The preparation of financial  statements in conformity  with generally  accepted 
accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that 
affect  the  reported  amounts  of assets  and  liabilities  and  disclosure  of 
contingent  assets and  liabilities at the date of the financial  statements and 
the  reported  amounts of revenues  and expenses  during the  reporting  period. 
Actual results could differ from those estimates. In accordance with ASC No. 250 
all adjustments are normal and recurring. 
 
                                       26 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                         (An Exploration Stage Company) 
                          Notes to Financial Statements 
                                January 31, 2013 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
NOTE 2. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED) 
 
INCOME TAXES 
 
Income taxes are provided in accordance with ASC No. 740,  Accounting for Income 
Taxes.  A  deferred  tax  asset  or  liability  is  recorded  for all  temporary 
differences   between  financial  and  tax  reporting  and  net  operating  loss 
carryforwards. Deferred tax expense (benefit) results from the net change during 
the year of deferred tax assets and liabilities. 
 
Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of 
management,  it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred 
tax  assets  will not be  realized.  Deferred  tax assets  and  liabilities  are 
adjusted  for the  effects  of  changes  in tax  laws  and  rates on the date of 
enactment. 
 
REVENUE 
 
The Company  records  revenue on the accrual  basis when all goods and  services 
have been performed and  delivered,  the amounts are readily  determinable,  and 
collection  is  reasonably  assured.  The Company has not  generated any revenue 
since its inception. 
 
ADVERTISING 
 
The  Company  will  expense its  advertising  when  incurred.  There has been no 
advertising since inception.
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 18 of 24
OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES 
 
Oil and gas  investments  are accounted for by the successful  efforts method of 
accounting.  Accordingly,  the costs  incurred to acquire  property  (proved and 
unproved),   all  development  costs,  and  successful   exploratory  costs  are 
capitalized, whereas the costs of unsuccessful exploratory wells are expensed. 
 
Depletion of  capitalized  oil and gas well costs is provided using the units of 
production  method based on estimated  proved  developed oil and gas reserves of 
the respective oil and gas properties. 
 
NOTE 3. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUCEMENTS 
 
The Company has evaluated all the recent accounting  pronouncements  through the 
date the  financial  statements  were issued and filed with the  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission and believe that none of them will have a material effect on 
the Company's financial statements. 
 
                                       27 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                         (An Exploration Stage Company) 
                          Notes to Financial Statements 
                                January 31, 2013 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
NOTE 4. GOING CONCERN 
 
The  accompanying  financial  statements are presented on a going concern basis. 
The Company has had limited  operations  during the period from January 23, 2012 
(date of  inception)  to January 31,  2013 and  generated a net loss of $19,249. 
This condition raises  substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue 
as a going  concern.  The Company is  currently  in the  exploration  stage with 
limited  operations  on  a  single  well  and  has  minimal  expenses,  however, 
management  believes that the Company's  current cash of $10,117 is insufficient 
to cover the expenses they will incur during the next twelve months in a limited 
operations scenario or until it raises additional funding. 
 
NOTE 5. WARRANTS AND OPTIONS 
 
There are no warrants or options outstanding to acquire any additional shares of 
common stock. 
 
NOTE 6. INVESTMENTS IN OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES 
 
Cecil Barlow 
 
On February 2, 2012 the Company acquired the Cecil Barlow lease in Caddo Parish, 
Louisiana for $10,000. Subsequently, the Company has spent an additional $27,102 
in upgrades to the well. 
 
As of January 31, 2013 the Company has depleted the asset by $1,855. 
 
NOTE 7. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS 
 
The sole officer and director of the Company may, in the future, become involved 
in other business opportunities as they become available, he may face a conflict 
in  selecting  between  the Company and his other  business  opportunities.  The 
Company has not formulated a policy for the resolution of such conflicts. 
 
As of January 31, 2013,  $15,000 the funds loaned by Robert Gelfand,  President, 
have been repaid in full. 
 
                                       28 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                         (An Exploration Stage Company) 
                          Notes to Financial Statements 
                                January 31, 2013 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
NOTE 8. INCOME TAXES 
 
                                                          As of January 31, 2013 
                                                          ---------------------- 
      Deferred tax assets: 
        Net operating tax carryforwards                          $ 19,249 
        Tax rate                                                       34% 
                                                                 -------- 
        Gross deferred tax assets                                   6,545 
        Valuation allowance                                        (6,545) 
                                                                 -------- 
 
        Net deferred tax assets                                  $     -- 
                                                                 ======== 
 
Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon  sufficient  future taxable 
income during the period that deductible temporary differences and carryforwards 
are expected to be available to reduce  taxable  income.  As the  achievement of
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 19 of 24
required  future taxable income is uncertain,  the Company  recorded a valuation 
allowance. 
 
NOTE 9. NET OPERATING LOSSES 
 
As of January 31, 2013,  the Company has a net operating  loss  carryforward  of 
approximately $19,249. Net operating loss carryforwards expire twenty years from 
the date the loss was incurred. 
 
NOTE 10. STOCK TRANSACTIONS 
 
Transactions,  other than employees' stock issuance,  are in accordance with ASC 
No. 505.  Thus  issuances  shall be accounted for based on the fair value of the 
consideration  received.  Transactions  with  employees'  stock  issuance are in 
accordance with ASC No. 718. These issuances shall be accounted for based on the 
fair  value  of the  consideration  received  or the fair  value  of the  equity 
instruments issued, or whichever is more readily determinable. 
 
On January 23, 2012, the Company  issued a total of 10,000,000  shares of common 
stock to its sole  officer/director  for cash in the  amount of $0.001 per share 
for a total of $10,000. 
 
On July 12, 2012, the Company completed its registered  offering raising $50,000 
from the sale of 10,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $.001. 
 
As of January 31, 2013 the Company had 20,000,000  shares of common stock issued 
and outstanding. 
 
                                       29 
<PAGE> 
                             AMERICAN OIL & GAS INC. 
                         (An Exploration Stage Company) 
                          Notes to Financial Statements 
                                January 31, 2013 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
NOTE 11. STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY 
 
The  stockholders'  equity section of the Company contains the following classes 
of capital stock as of January 31, 2013: 
 
Common stock, $ 0.001 par value: 75,000,000 shares authorized; 20,000,000 shares 
issued and outstanding. 
 
NOTE 12. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS 
 
The Company evaluated all events or transactions that occurred after January 31, 
2013 up through date the Company issued these financial statements. 
 
                                       30 
<PAGE> 
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 
 
EVALUATION OF DISCLOSURE CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 
 
Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including 
our principal executive officer and the principal financial officer (our 
president), we have conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design 
and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures, as defined in Rules 
13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as of the 
end of the period covered by this report. Based on this evaluation, our 
principal executive officer and principal financial officer concluded as of the 
evaluation date that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective such 
that the material information required to be included in our Securities and 
Exchange Commission reports is accumulated and communicated to our management, 
including our principal executive and financial officer, recorded, processed, 
summarized and reported within the time periods specified in Securities and 
Exchange Commission rules and forms relating to our company, particularly during 
the period when this report was being prepared. 
 
MANAGEMENT'S ANNUAL REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING 
 
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal 
control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 
15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act, for the Company. 
 
Internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures 
that: (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, 
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of our assets; 
(2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to 
permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles, and that our receipts and expenditures are being made 
only in accordance with authorizations of its management and directors; and (3) 
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of 
unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of our assets that could have a 
material effect on the financial statements. 
 
Management recognizes that there are inherent limitations in the effectiveness 
of any system of internal control, and accordingly, even effective internal 
control can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 20 of 24
statement preparation and may not prevent or detect material misstatements. In 
addition, effective internal control at a point in time may become ineffective 
in future periods because of changes in conditions or due to deterioration in 
the degree of compliance with our established policies and procedures. 
 
A material weakness is a significant deficiency, or combination of significant 
deficiencies, that results in there being a more than remote likelihood that a 
material misstatement of the annual or interim financial statements will not be 
prevented or detected. 
 
Under the supervision and with the participation of our president, management 
conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over 
financial reporting, as of January 31, 2013, based on the framework set forth in 
Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). Based on our evaluation under 
this framework, management concluded that our internal control over financial 
reporting was not effective as of the evaluation date due to the factors stated 
below. 
 
                                       31 
<PAGE> 
Management assessed the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over 
financial reporting as of evaluation date and identified the following material 
weaknesses: 
 
INSUFFICIENT RESOURCES: We have an inadequate number of personnel with requisite 
expertise in the key functional areas of finance and accounting. 
 
INADEQUATE SEGREGATION OF DUTIES: We have an inadequate number of personnel to 
properly implement control procedures. 
 
LACK OF AUDIT COMMITTEE & OUTSIDE DIRECTORS ON THE COMPANY'S BOARD OF DIRECTORS: 
We do not have a functioning audit committee or outside directors on our board 
of directors, resulting in ineffective oversight in the establishment and 
monitoring of required internal controls and procedures. 
 
Management is committed to improving its internal controls and will (1) continue 
to use third party specialists to address shortfalls in staffing and to assist 
the Company with accounting and finance responsibilities, (2) increase the 
frequency of independent reconciliations of significant accounts which will 
mitigate the lack of segregation of duties until there are sufficient personnel 
and (3) may consider appointing outside directors and audit committee members in 
the future. 
 
Management, including our president, has discussed the material weakness noted 
above with our independent registered public accounting firm. Due to the nature 
of this material weakness, there is a more than remote likelihood that 
misstatements which could be material to the annual or interim financial 
statements could occur that would not be prevented or detected. 
 
This annual report does not include an attestation report of our registered 
public accounting firm regarding internal control over financial reporting. 
Management's report was not subject to attestation by the our registered public 
accounting firm pursuant to temporary rules of the SEC that permit us to provide 
only management's report in this annual report. 
 
CHANGES IN INTERNAL CONTROLS OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING 
 
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that 
occurred during the last fiscal quarter for our fiscal year ended January 31, 
2013 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially 
affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 
 
                                       32 
<PAGE> 
                                    PART III 
 
ITEM 10. DIRECTOR AND EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
 
The name, age and title of our executive officer/director at January 31, 2013 is 
as follows: 
 
Name & Address             Age    Position     Date First Elected   Term Expires 
--------------             ---    --------     ------------------   ------------ 
Robert Gelfand             47     President,        1/23/12           1/31/14 
Suite 400 - 601 W Broadway        Secretary, 
Vancouver, BC                     Treasurer, 
V5Z 4C2                           CFO, CEO & 
                                  Director 
 
The foregoing person is a promoter of AO&G, as that term is defined in the rules 
and regulations promulgated under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1933. 
Directors are elected to serve until the next annual meeting of stockholders and 
until their successors have been elected and qualified. Officers are appointed 
to serve until the meeting of the board of directors following the next annual 
meeting of stockholders and until their successors have been elected and 
qualified. 
 
Robert Gelfand currently devotes 2-4 hours per week to company matters, in the 
future he intends to devote as much time as the board of directors deems
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 21 of 24
necessary to manage the affairs of the company. 
 
No executive officer or director of the corporation has been the subject of any 
order, judgment, or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, or any 
regulatory agency permanently or temporarily enjoining, barring, suspending or 
otherwise limiting him from acting as an investment advisor, underwriter, broker 
or dealer in the securities industry, or as an affiliated person, director or 
employee of an investment company, bank, savings and loan association, or 
insurance company or from engaging in or continuing any conduct or practice in 
connection with any such activity or in connection with the purchase or sale of 
any securities. 
 
No executive officer or director of the corporation has been convicted in any 
criminal proceeding (excluding traffic violations) or is the subject of a 
criminal proceeding which is currently pending. 
 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 
ROBERT GELFAND has been the President, CEO, Treasurer, CFO, Secretary, and 
Director of the Company since inception. From July 1996 to the present he has 
been a Director of StarAsia Capital Inc., a venture capital company for 
development and start-up stage companies in Bangkok, Thailand and Vancouver, 
Canada. Mr. Gelfand has held officer and director positions of several publicly 
traded companies over the past 15 years. 
 
Mr. Gelfand holds a Bachelor of Commerce Degree (Finance major) from The 
University of British Columbia, in Vancouver, BC, Canada where he received it in 
1989. Mr. Gelfand also holds the Chartered Financial Analyst designation (CFA) 
which he received from the CFA Institute in Charlottesville, Virginia. He 
intends to devote his time as required to the business of the Company. 
 
                                       33 
<PAGE> 
CODE OF ETHICS 
 
We do not currently have a code of ethics, because we have only limited business 
operations and only one officer and director, we believe a code of ethics would 
have limited utility. We intend to adopt such a code of ethics as our business 
operations expand and we have more directors, officers and employees. 
 
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
 
Our current officer receives no compensation. The current Board of Directors is 
comprised of Robert Gelfand. 
 
<TABLE> 
<CAPTION> 
                           SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE 
 
                                                                                 Change in 
                                                                                  Pension 
                                                                                 Value and 
                                                                   Non-Equity   Nonqualified 
                                                                   Incentive     Deferred       All 
 Name and                                                            Plan         Compen-      Other 
 Principal                                   Stock       Option     Compen-       sation       Compen- 
 Position       Year   Salary     Bonus      Awards      Awards     sation       Earnings      sation     Totals 
------------    ----   ------     -----      ------      ------     ------       --------      ------     ------ 
<S>             <C>       <C>       <C>          <C>        <C>        <C>           <C>         <C>        <C> 
Robert          2012     0          0          0           0          0             0             0         0 
Gelfand, 
President, 
CFO & CEO 
 
                  OUTSTANDING EQUITY AWARDS AT FISCAL YEAR END 
 
                                      Option Awards                                             Stock Awards 
          -----------------------------------------------------------------   ---------------------------------------------- 
                                                                                                                    Equity 
                                                                                                                   Incentive 
                                                                                                       Equity        Plan 
                                                                                                      Incentive     Awards: 
                                                                                                        Plan       Market or 
                                                                                                       Awards:      Payout 
                                          Equity                                                      Number of    Value of 
                                         Incentive                            Number                  Unearned     Unearned 
                                        Plan Awards;                            of         Market      Shares,      Shares, 
           Number of      Number of      Number of                            Shares      Value of    Units or     Units or 
          Securities     Securities     Securities                           or Units    Shares or     Other         Other 
          Underlying     Underlying     Underlying                           of Stock     Units of     Rights       Rights 
          Unexercised    Unexercised    Unexercised   Option      Option       That      Stock That     That         That 
          Options (#)    Options (#)     Unearned     Exercise  Expiration   Have Not     Have Not    Have Not     Have Not 
Name      Exercisable   Unexercisable   Options (#)    Price       Date      Vested(#)     Vested      Vested       Vested 
----      -----------   -------------   -----------    -----       ----      ---------     ------      ------       ------ 
 
Robert         0              0              0           0           0           0            0           0            0 
Gelfand, 
CEO & CFO 
</TABLE>
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 22 of 24
34 
<PAGE> 
<TABLE> 
<CAPTION> 
                              DIRECTOR COMPENSATION 
 
                                                                     Change in 
                                                                      Pension 
                                                                     Value and 
                   Fees                            Non-Equity       Nonqualified 
                  Earned                            Incentive        Deferred 
                 Paid in      Stock     Option        Plan         Compensation     All Other 
    Name           Cash      Awards     Awards     Compensation      Earnings      Compensation     Total 
    ----           ----      ------     ------     ------------      --------      ------------     ----- 
<S>                  <C>       <C>        <C>           <C>              <C>            <C>           <C> 
Robert Gelfand,      0         0          0             0                0              0             0 
Director 
</TABLE> 
 
There are no current employment agreements between the company and its executive 
officer. 
 
In January 2012 Robert Gelfand purchased 10,000,000 shares of our common stock 
at $0.001 per share. The terms of these stock issuances were as fair to the 
company, in the opinion of the board of directors, as could have been made with 
an unaffiliated third party. 
 
Mr. Gelfand currently devotes approximately 2-4 hours per week to manage the 
affairs of the company. He has agreed to work with no remuneration until such 
time as the company receives sufficient revenues necessary to provide management 
salaries. At this time, we cannot accurately estimate when sufficient revenues 
will occur to implement this compensation, or what the amount of the 
compensation will be. 
 
There are no annuity, pension or retirement benefits proposed to be paid to 
officers, directors or employees in the event of retirement at normal retirement 
date pursuant to any presently existing plan provided or contributed to by the 
company or any of its subsidiaries, if any. 
 
ITEM 12.  SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT 
 
The following table sets forth certain information concerning the number of 
shares of our common stock owned beneficially as of January 31, 2013 of: (i) 
each person (including any group) known to us to own more than five percent (5%) 
of any class of our voting securities, (ii) our director, and or (iii) our 
officer. Unless otherwise indicated, the stockholder listed possesses sole 
voting and investment power with respect to the shares shown. 
 
<TABLE> 
<CAPTION> 
                                                         Amount and Nature     Percentage of 
                       Name and Address                    of Beneficial          Common 
Title of Class        of Beneficial Owner                    Ownership            Stock(1) 
--------------        -------------------                    ---------            -------- 
<S>                <C>                                       <C>                    <C> 
Common Stock       Robert Gelfand, Director                  10,000,000             50% 
                   Suite 400-601 West Broadway                 Direct 
                   Vancouver, BC  V5Z 4C2 
 
Common Stock       Officer and/or director as a Group        10,000,000             50% 
 
HOLDERS OF MORE THAN 5% OF OUR COMMON STOCK 
</TABLE> 
 
                                       35 
<PAGE> 
---------- 
(1)  A beneficial owner of a security includes any person who, directly or 
     indirectly, through any contract, arrangement, understanding, relationship, 
     or otherwise has or shares: (i) voting power, which includes the power to 
     vote, or to direct the voting of shares; and (ii) investment power, which 
     includes the power to dispose or direct the disposition of shares. Certain 
     shares may be deemed to be beneficially owned by more than one person (if, 
     for example, persons share the power to vote or the power to dispose of the 
     shares). In addition, shares are deemed to be beneficially owned by a 
     person if the person has the right to acquire the shares (for example, upon 
     exercise of an option) within 60 days of the date as of which the 
     information is provided. In computing the percentage ownership of any 
     person, the amount of shares outstanding is deemed to include the amount of 
     shares beneficially owned by such person (and only such person) by reason 
     of these acquisition rights. As a result, the percentage of outstanding 
     shares of any person as shown in this table does not necessarily reflect 
     the person's actual ownership or voting power with respect to the number of 
     shares of common stock actually outstanding as of the date of this report. 
     As of the date of this report, there were 8,800,000 shares of our common 
     stock issued and outstanding, 6,000,000 shares being held by our officer 
     and director. 
 
FUTURE SALES BY EXISTING STOCKHOLDERS
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 23 of 24
As of January 31, 2013, a total of 10,000,000 shares have been issued to Robert 
Gelfand, an officer/director, and are restricted securities, as that term is 
defined in Rule 144 of the Rules and Regulations of the SEC promulgated under 
the Act. Under Rule 144, such shares can be publicly sold, subject to volume 
restrictions and certain restrictions on the manner of sale, commencing six 
months after their acquisition. 
 
Rule 144(i)(1) states that the Rule 144 safe harbor is not available for the 
resale of securities "initially issued" by a shell company (other than a 
business combination related shell company) or an issuer that has "at any time 
previously" been a shell company (other than a business combination related 
shell company). Consequently, the Rule 144 safe harbor is not available for the 
resale of such securities unless and until all of the conditions in Rule 
144(i)(2) are satisfied at the time of the proposed sale. 
 
Any sale of shares held by the existing stockholder (after applicable 
restrictions expire) may have a depressive effect on the price of our common 
stock in any market that may develop, of which there can be no assurance. Our 
principal shareholder does not have any plans to sell his shares at this time. 
 
ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS 
 
In January 2012 Mr. Gelfand purchased 10,000,000 shares of our common stock at 
$0.001 per share. All of such shares are "restricted" securities, as that term 
is defined by the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and are held by the 
officer and director of the Company. (See "Principal Stockholders".) 
 
We do not currently have any conflicts of interest by or among our current 
officer, director, key employee or advisors. We have not yet formulated a policy 
for handling conflicts of interest; however, we intend to do so prior to hiring 
any additional employees. 
 
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES 
 
The total fees charged to the Company for audit services, including quarterly 
reviews, were $8,800 for audit-related services were $Nil, for tax services were 
$Nil and for other services were $Nil during the year ended January 31, 2013. 
 
The total fees charged to the Company for audit services, including quarterly 
reviews, were $0 for audit-related services were $Nil, for tax services were 
$Nil and for other services were $Nil during the year ended January 31, 2012. 
 
                                       36 
<PAGE> 
                                     PART IV 
 
ITEM 15.  EXHIBITS 
 
The following exhibits are included with this filing: 
 
Exhibit 
Number                  Description 
------                  ----------- 
 
  3(i)         Articles of Incorporation* 
  3(ii)        Bylaws* 
 31.1          Sec. 302 Certification of CEO 
 31.2          Sec. 302 Certification of CFO 
 32.1          Sec. 906 Certification of CEO 
 23.2          Sec. 906 Certification of CFO 
101            Interactive Data Files pursuant to Regulation S-T 
 
---------- 
*    Included in our Registration Statement of Form S-1 under Commission File 
     Number 333-180164. 
 
                                       37 
<PAGE> 
                                   SIGNATURES 
 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on 
its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. 
 
May 16, 2013             American Oil & Gas Inc. 
 
 
                             /s/ Robert Gelfand 
                             --------------------------------------------------- 
                         By: Robert Gelfand 
                             (Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, 
                             Principal Accounting Officer, President, Secretary, 
                             Treasurer & Director) 
 
In accordance with the Exchange Act, this report has been signed below by the 
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the 
dates indicated. 
 
May 16, 2013             American Oil & Gas Inc.
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013
Page 24 of 24
/s/ Robert Gelfand 
                             --------------------------------------------------- 
                         By: Robert Gelfand 
                             (Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, 
                             Principal Accounting Officer, President, Secretary, 
                             Treasurer & Director) 
 
                                       38 
</TEXT> 
</DOCUMENT>
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1544400/000116552713000498/g6807.txt
12/06/2013