
<SEC-DOCUMENT>0001171843-16-011763.txt : 20160815
<SEC-HEADER>0001171843-16-011763.hdr.sgml : 20160815
<ACCEPTANCE-DATETIME>20160815111307
ACCESSION NUMBER:
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:
FILED AS OF DATE:
DATE AS OF CHANGE:
6-K
2
20160815
0001171843-16-011763
20160815
20160815
FILER:
COMPANY DATA:
COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:
CENTRAL INDEX KEY:
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION: GOLD & SILVER ORES [1040]
IRS NUMBER:
STATE OF INCORPORATION:
FISCAL YEAR END:
SEABRIDGE GOLD INC
0001231346
000000000
1231
A6
FILING VALUES:
FORM TYPE:
SEC ACT:
SEC FILE NUMBER: 001-32135
FILM NUMBER:
6-K
1934 Act
161830842
BUSINESS ADDRESS:
STREET 1:
STREET 2:
CITY:
STATE:
ZIP:
BUSINESS PHONE:
106 FRONT STREET EAST
SUITE 400
TORONTO
A6
M5A 1E1
416-367-9292
MAIL ADDRESS:
STREET 1:
STREET 2:
CITY:
STATE:
ZIP:
106 FRONT STREET EAST
SUITE 400
TORONTO
A6
M5A 1E1
</SEC-HEADER>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>6-K
<SEQUENCE>1
<FILENAME>f6k_081516.htm
<DESCRIPTION>FORM 6-K
<TEXT>
<html><head><title></title></head><body style="FONT-FAMILY: Times New Roman; 
FONT-SIZE: 10pt"><div align="center"><div style="margin-top: 3pt; margin-bottom:
12pt;"><div style="font-size: 1pt; border-top: Black 2.5pt solid; border-bottom:
Black 1.1pt solid; width: 100%;">&#160;</div></div><p style="font-size: 14pt;" 
align="center"><strong>SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE 
COMMISSION</strong><br><strong>Washington, D.C. 20549</strong></p><p 
style="font-size: 14pt; text-transform: uppercase;" align="center"><strong>Form 
6-K</strong></p><p style="text-align: center;"><strong></strong></p><p 
style="text-align: center;"><strong>REPORT OF FOREIGN PRIVATE ISSUER PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-16 OR 15d-16 UNDER THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934</strong></p><p 
style="text-align: center;"><strong></strong><strong>For the month of August 
2016</strong></p><p style="text-align: center;">Commission File Number: 
<strong>1-32135</strong></p><p style="text-align: center;"><font style="font-
size: 12pt;"><strong>Seabridge Gold Inc.</strong></font><br>(Translation of 
registrant's name into English)</p><p style="text-align: center;"><strong>106 
Front Street East, Suite 400, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5A 
1E1</strong><br>(Address of principal executive office)</p></div><p>Indicate by
check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover 
of Form 20-F or Form 40-F.<br>Form 20-F [&#160;&#160; ] 
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;Form 40-F [&#160;X ]</p><p>Indicate by check mark 
if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by Regulation
S-T Rule 101(b)(1): <u></u></p><!--<p><strong>Note:&#160;</strong>Regulation S-T
Rule 101(b)(1) only permits the submission in paper of a Form 6-K if submitted 
solely to provide an attached annual report to security holders.</p>--
><p>Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper
as permitted by Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(7): <u></u></p><p>If "Yes" is marked,
indicate below the file number assigned to the registrant in connection with 
Rule 12g3-2(b): 82-_________</p><p>The exhibit in this Report on Form 6-K is 
being incorporated by reference into the Registrant&rsquo;s Registration 
Statement on Form F-10/A (File No. 333-197653), as may be amended and 
supplemented.</p><!--<p><strong>Note:&#160;</strong>Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)
(7) only permits the submission in paper of a Form 6-K if submitted to furnish a
report or other document that the registrant foreign private issuer must furnish
and make public under the laws of the jurisdiction in which the registrant is 
incorporated, domiciled or legally organized (the registrant's "home country"), 
or under the rules of the home country exchange on which the registrant's 
securities are traded, as long as the report or other document is not a press 
release, is not required to be and has not been distributed to the registrant's 
security holders, and, if discussing a material event, has already been the 
subject of a Form 6-K submission or other Commission filing on 
EDGAR.&#160;</p>--><hr style="page-break-after: always;" noshade="noshade"><p>On
August 15, 2016, the Registrant issued a press release, a copy of which is 
attached hereto as Exhibit 99.1 and is incorporated herein by reference. <br> 
</br> <br> </br>(c) Exhibit 99.1. Press release dated August 15, 2016</p><hr 
style="page-break-after: always;" noshade="noshade"><p style="text-align: 
center;"><strong>SIGNATURES</strong></p><p>Pursuant to the requirements of the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to 
be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.</p><table
style="font-family: Times New Roman; font-size: 10pt;" border="0" width="100%" 
cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0"><tr valign="top"><td width="47%">&#160;</td><td 
width="6%">&#160;</td><td style="text-decoration: underline;" align="center" 
width="47%"><strong>&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;Seabridge Gold 
Inc.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;</strong></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td 
width="47%">&#160;</td><td width="6%">&#160;</td><td align="center" 
width="47%">(Registrant)</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td 
width="47%">&#160;</td><td width="6%">&#160;</td><td align="center" 
width="47%">&#160;</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td width="47%">&#160;</td><td 
width="6%">&#160;</td><td align="center" width="47%"></td></tr><tr 
valign="top"><td width="47%">Date: August 15, 2016</td><td 
width="6%">&#160;</td><td style="text-decoration: underline;" align="center" 
width="47%">&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;/s/ Chris 
Reynolds&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td 
width="47%">&#160;</td><td width="6%">&#160;</td><td align="center" 
width="47%">Chris Reynolds</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td 
width="47%">&#160;</td><td width="6%">&#160;</td><td align="center" 
width="47%">VP Finance and CFO</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td 
width="47%">&#160;</td><td width="6%">&#160;</td><td align="center" 
width="47%"></td></tr></table></body></html>
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-99.1
<SEQUENCE>2
<FILENAME>exh_991.htm
<DESCRIPTION>PRESS RELEASE
<TEXT>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.0 Transitional//EN"><html lang="en-
US"><head><title>EdgarFiling</title><meta content="text/html; charset=windows-
1252"><meta name="GENERATOR" content="MSHTML 8.00.7601.18094"></head><body 
bgcolor="#ffffff"><p style="text-align: right;"><strong>EXHIBIT 
99.1</strong></p><p style="text-align: center;"><strong>Seabridge Begins First
Drill Campaign at Iskut High Grade Gold Project</strong></p><p style="text-
align: center;"><p><p align="left">TORONTO, Aug.  15, 2016  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- 
Seabridge Gold (TSX:SEA) (NYSE:SA) announced today that drilling has begun at 
its 100%-owned Iskut Project in northwestern British Columbia. The program calls
for 3,000 meters of core drilling designed to help determine controls on gold 
mineralization for several known occurrences including past high grade 
producers. Results from this year&#8217;s drilling will be used to design a much
larger program for next year.<br></p><p align="left">This year&#8217;s initial 
drill program is based in part on considerable historical data compiled by 
previous owners and now being re-interpreted by Seabridge&#8217;s exploration 
team. This information is being augmented by relogging, sampling and assaying 
old drill core, much of which had not been previously analyzed. To date, 37 
holes have been relogged and 1,124 samples have been sent for assay.</p><p 
align="left">A new geophysical program has also been initiated, using full 
tensor magnetotellurics (MT) to provide resistivity images of target areas. 
These resistivity images are being used to identify altered structures and 
extensive hydrothermal alteration associated with mineralization.</p><p 
align="left">Commenting on the program, Chairman and CEO Rudi Fronk noted that 
&#8220;our exploration team has developed a very positive perception of the 
potential of the Iskut property. In our view, Iskut could host extensive 
district-scale porphyry-style mineral systems similar to our nearby KSM project.
These systems would account for the Iskut property&#8217;s numerous gold and 
copper mineral occurrences. However, at Iskut, unlike at KSM, these systems 
appear to be largely intact from top to bottom, not eroded or faulted away. If 
so, this would mean that the epithermal tops of the porphyry systems, which 
typically host high grade precious metals, could remain intact near 
surface,&#8221; Fronk said. &#8220;These are the kinds of occurrences we are 
targeting.&#8221;</p><p align="left">The Iskut Project was obtained with the 
closing of Seabridge&#8217;s acquisition of SnipGold Corp. in June, 2016. The 
property is located in northwestern British Columbia, about 110 km northwest of 
Stewart, BC and 30 km by air from Seabridge&#8217;s KSM Project. The Iskut 
property consists of a contiguous block of 100 BC Mineral Claims, 2 Mineral 
Leases and 13 Crown Grants covering 29,436 hectares (294 km<sup>2</sup>) 
situated in the Liard Mining Division.</p><p align="left">The consolidated land 
package has undergone intermittent exploration since 1907 with the majority of 
the work carried out in the late 1980s and early 1990s. More than 30 independent
operators have owned and worked claims within the Iskut property and their 
uncoordinated efforts discovered numerous promising targets. Very few of these 
discoveries have been systematically explored over the past 20 years. The 
property includes the former high grade gold Johnny Mountain Mine and the 
copper-gold Bronson Slope resource.</p><p align="left">Exploration activities by
Seabridge at the Iskut Project are being conducted under the supervision of 
William E. Threlkeld, Registered Professional Geologist, Senior Vice President 
of the Company and a Qualified Person as defined by National Instrument 43-101. 
Mr. Threlkeld has reviewed and approved this news release. An ongoing and 
rigorous quality control/quality assurance protocol is employed in all Seabridge
drilling campaigns. This program includes blank and reference standards. Cross-
check analyses are conducted at a second external laboratory on at least 10% of 
the drill samples.</p><p align="left">Seabridge holds a 100% interest in several
North American gold projects. The Company's principal assets are the KSM Project
located near Stewart, British Columbia, Canada and the Courageous Lake gold 
project located in Canada's Northwest Territories. For a full breakdown of 
Seabridge's mineral reserves and mineral resources by category please visit the 
Company's website at http://www.seabridgegold.net/resources.php.</p><p 
align="left"><strong>All reserve and resource estimates reported by the 
Corporation were calculated in accordance with the Canadian National Instrument 
43-101 and the Canadian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy Classification 
system. These standards differ significantly from the requirements of the U.S. 
Securities and Exchange Commission. Mineral resources which are not mineral 
reserves do not have demonstrated economic viability.</strong></p><p 
align="left"><strong>This document contains "forward-looking information" within
the meaning of Canadian securities legislation and "forward-looking statements" 
within the meaning of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
of 1995. This information and these statements, referred to herein as "forward-
looking statements" are made as of the date of this document. Forward-looking 
statements relate to future events or future performance and reflect current 
estimates, predictions, expectations or beliefs regarding future events and 
include, but are not limited to, statements with respect to: (i) this 
year&#8217;s program leading to a larger program next year; (ii) the potential 
of the Iskut property; (iii) the Iskut property hosting a district-scale 
porphyry-style mineral systems and that such systems remain intact from top to 
bottom with characteristic epithermal tops; and (iv) that the Iskut property 
mineral systems are not as deeply eroded as those at KSM and the very high grade
precious metal occurrences typical of these systems could be found near surface 
at Iskut.</strong> <strong>Any statements that express or involve discussions 
with respect to predictions, expectations, beliefs, plans, projections, 
objectives or future events or performance (often, but not always, using words 
or phrases such as "expects", "anticipates", "plans", "projects", "estimates", 
"envisages", "assumes", "intends", "strategy", "goals", "objectives" or 
variations thereof or stating that certain actions, events or results "may", 
"could", "would", "might" or "will" be taken, occur or be achieved, or the 
negative of any of these terms and similar expressions) are not statements of 
historical fact and may be forward-looking statements.</strong></p><p 
align="left"><strong>All forward-looking statements are based on Seabridge's or 
its consultants' current beliefs as well as various assumptions made by them and
information currently available to them. The principle assumptions regarding 
disclosure on the Iskut Property include: (i) that the Company will be 
successful in future efforts to finance the Company; and (ii) the mineralized 
system at the Iskut Property will conform to similar systems elsewhere. The 
principle assumptions regarding disclosure on the reserve at the KSM Project are
set forth in Seabridge's Annual Information Form filed with SEDAR in Canada 
(available at www.sedar.com) for the year ended December 31, 2015 and in the 
Corporation's Annual Report Form 40-F filed with the U.S. Securities and 
Exchange Commission on EDGAR (available at www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml) Although 
management considers these assumptions to be reasonable based on information 
currently available to it, they may prove to be incorrect. Many forward-looking 
statements are made assuming the correctness of other forward looking 
statements, such as statements of net present value and internal rates of 
return, which are based on most of the other forward-looking statements and 
assumptions herein. The cost information is also prepared using current values, 
but the time for incurring the costs will be in the future and it is assumed 
costs will remain stable over the relevant period. </strong></p><p 
align="left"><strong>By their very nature, forward-looking statements involve 
inherent risks and uncertainties, both general and specific, and risks exist 
that estimates, forecasts, projections and other forward-looking statements will
not be achieved or that assumptions do not reflect future experience. We caution
readers not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements as a 
number of important factors could cause the actual outcomes to differ materially
from the beliefs, plans, objectives, expectations, anticipations, estimates, 
assumptions and intentions expressed in such forward-looking statements. These 
risk factors may be generally stated as the risk that the assumptions and 
estimates expressed above do not occur, but specifically include, without 
limitation: risks relating to variations in the mineral content within the 
material identified as mineral reserves or mineral resources from that 
predicted; variations in rates of recovery and extraction; developments in world
metals markets; risks relating to fluctuations in the Canadian dollar relative 
to the US dollar; increases in the estimated capital and operating costs or 
unanticipated costs; difficulties attracting the necessary work force; increases
in financing costs or adverse changes to the terms of available financing, if 
any; tax rates or royalties being greater than assumed; changes in exploration, 
development or mining plans due to changes in logistical, technical or other 
factors; changes in project parameters as plans continue to be refined; risks 
relating to receipt of regulatory approvals or settlement of an agreement with 
impacted First Nations groups; the effects of competition in the
 markets in which Seabridge operates; operational and infrastructure risks and 
the additional risks described in Seabridge's Annual Information Form filed with
SEDAR in Canada (available at www.sedar.com) for the year ended December 31, 
2015 and in the Corporation's Annual Report Form 40-F filed with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission on EDGAR (available at 
www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml). Seabridge cautions that the foregoing list of factors 
that may affect future results is not exhaustive. </strong></p><p 
align="left"><strong>When relying on our forward-looking statements to make 
decisions with respect to Seabridge, investors and others should carefully 
consider the foregoing factors and other uncertainties and potential events. 
Seabridge does not undertake to update any forward-looking statement, whether 
written or oral, that may be made from time to time by Seabridge or on our 
behalf, except as required by law.</strong></p><p 
align="left"><strong><strong>ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD<br></strong></strong>"Rudi 
Fronk" <br>Chairman &amp; C.E.O.</p></p><p>For further information please 
contact:<br>Rudi P. Fronk, Chairman and C.E.O.<br>Tel: (416) 367-9292 &#183; 
Fax: (416) 367-2711<br>Email: &#160;info@seabridgegold.net</p></body></html>
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
</SEC-DOCUMENT>