* * * *

The Voyage of
The Sable Keech

[Spatterjay 02]

By Neal Asher

Scanned & Proofed By MadMaxAU

* * * *

Prologue

Seeing the creature loom out of the underwater gloom, Vrell immediately
recognized it from the bio-files concerning this planet’s fauna. The humans
called it a molly carp—the second part of its name resulting from its huge
main body resembling a Terran fish called a carp. However, rather than use its
tail for propulsion, this creature towed itself along the seabed with masses
of belly tentacles. Now, it drew to a halt, those same tentacles winding
together to form one trunk, so it came to stand like some strange fleshy tree.
Perhaps this was some form of camouflage? No, the trunk twisted, turning the
utterly level carp body towards Vrell, and thick lips drew back from a mass of
translucent teeth.

Vrell felt his guts shrink with fear. Those few weapons he had retained were
useless here, as they had been specifically designed for land warfare.
Moreover, the natural cowardice of Prador adulthood—which he had only recently
attained—had been exacerbated by many recent attempts on his life. He kept
moving further down into the depths, his beacon return telling him that his
father’s ship was not far away. The carp eagerly closed in and began to circle
him, observing. Perhaps it was curious about this potential dinner.

Vrell now surmised that his father, Ebulan, had been verging on senility, of

which his venture to this hostile world had been just one sign. The war
against mankind had been over for most of Ebulan’s lifetime and now trade and
better relations were growing between the Prador and the humans. Because of
atrocities Ebulan, with the connivance of certain humans, had committed here
during that long-ago war—the coring of humans to use as Prador slaves—his
fortunes in the Kingdom had recently been on the wane. However, coming here in
an attempt to wipe out the Old Captains—ancient sea captains who were the only
remaining survivors of the coring trade and therefore actual witnesses to
Ebulan’s crimes—had been futile. Vrell, being an adolescent rigidly under the
control of his father’s pheromones, had no say in the matter, and nearly died
as a result. During those same events Ebulan’s spaceship had been knocked out
of the sky by some missile, and it seemed likely that all those aboard were
dead. Vrell assumed himself the only survivor—and maybe not even that for much
longer.

The bottom here was a sloping stone slab crawling with leeches. Vrell skirted
the occasional clusters of spiral-shelled hammer whelks, knowing that a
concerted attack from them would be enough to crack his shell. The frog whelks
he encountered quickly scattered, perhaps thinking him some new kind of
glister—a creature he resembled only in that he possessed an exoskeleton and a
similar number of legs. Vrell saw the vague shape of his father’s crashed
spaceship ahead of him, picked out by the glow of still-burning internal
fires, when the molly carp finally attacked.

It came in fast and low, clamping its thick-lipped mouth on his damaged claw.
It rolled over, its tentacles starring around it. Vrell tried to spin over as
well, but was not fast enough. The monster tore Vrell’s claw away from his
body, gristle and tendons ripping out of his carapace and his green blood
squirting into the water. The pain of that would have been more than enough,
but while he was on his back, struggling to right himself, leeches attached
themselves to the wound and began eating their way in. His bubbling scream
echoed into the depths as he finally righted himself and forced himself
onwards. He turned one palp eye and watched the molly carp champing down on
his claw, crushing the shell as easily as chalk and sucking out the meat. He
could feel the leeches simultaneously working their way into his carapace,
chewing into his flesh, but could do nothing about that without the surgical
tools stored inside the ship. Once it finished the claw, the carp tilted its
head like a diner appreciating a particularly tasty starter, then it came
after Vrell again.

The molly carp hit his side, flipping him over again, bowed itself down over
him and snatched away one leg. Vrell dragged himself away on his back, as the
carp made a half-hearted attempt to pin him down with its tentacles. Almost
the instant he was upright again, another leech attached to this new wound,
and also began boring its way in.

As the Prador struggled on, the carp paused to run its recent prize back and
forth in its mouth like a toothpick. Vrell screeched and bubbled as it finally
snapped this down and surged towards him again. Ahead, the edge of Father’s
ship loomed like a cliff, and in that cliff Vrell spotted an open triangular
port. The carp hit him again, took away one of his remaining two manipulatory
limbs, and mashed it up in a cloud of green blood. Leeches now ribboned the

surrounding water. Vrell hit the lower lip of the port and scrabbled to pull
himself inside, but the carp clamped its mouth on the Prador’s carapace edge,
and began to drag him out. Vrell turned both his eye-palps to triangulate,
then kicked back with one sharp leg, piercing one of the creature’s eyes. The
carp released him, drew back, then jerked forwards again to close its mouth on
that same leg. Luckily it slipped at the last, and took off only the foot as
Vrell lurched inside, reaching out with his remaining claw for the door
controls. They were dead, however—there was no safety here.

Vrell sculled hard for the far wall of the chamber as the carp nosed inside
after him. He noted, along the side wall, four empty clamps which had
contained his father’s activated war drones. He was now in the drone cache.
There were spare drone shells left in another two clamps, but they contained
no minds so could offer no help. The control and backup mind would be here
somewhere, but somnolent. He reached an airlock, jammed his claw into the pit
control and began pumping the hydraulic opener. Slowly the lock door eased up,
releasing air that rose in wide flat bubbles to silver the ceiling. These
distracted the carp. It rose up high on its tentacles, sucked in a bubble and
blew it out again. Then it returned its attention to the panicking Prador.

The door was open nearly wide enough. Vrell jammed himself underneath it and
tried to heave it up further. He felt the carp bite on the rear of his
carapace, and shell cracking with an agonizing underwater thump. But the
attacker’s teeth then slipped and the Prador propelled himself into the lock
beyond. The molly carp itself was too big to follow, but still probed after
him. Through a haze of pain, Vrell pumped the door shut, hoping to sever some
of the creature’s tentacles, but the molly carp withdrew them just before the
lock closed.

* * * *

When the seal on the inner door broke, water quickly drained into the ship.
Intermittently issuing bubbling groans, Vrell continued working the hydraulic
door mechanism until he could follow the water into the dank corridors. His
father, he felt sure, was dead, but he had no intention of finding out for
sure just then. He could feel that the three leeches inside his carapace had
finished feeding—probably sated on the flesh they had already eaten as they
bored their way in—but they were shifting about and the pain was still
intense. He could do no more than keep dragging himself along the corridor on
his three remaining legs, unable to even swat away the ship lice that dropped
on him from above to graze around the edges of his wounds.

One of Father’s human blanks lay in the corridor, cut in half and burned down
to bone in places, but still moving weakly. Suddenly, despite his pain, Vrell
felt the hard clamp of hunger. He had not eaten in many days, and his recent
transformation into an adult had sapped his energy. With his remaining claw he
snipped away one of the blank’s arms, held it up to his mandibles, and began
stripping cooked flesh away from the bone. He was about to move on, but
realized the arm had not sated him, so he then picked up the remaining torso.
Soon he had finished that and, feeling more energized, began eyeing the

blank’s severed hips and legs. But then the leeches started moving inside his
carapace again and, hissing like a leaky air compressor, he lurched onwards.

The chamber he sought was open. Here a Prador second-child—one of Well’s own
siblings—lay in the corner with all its legs folded underneath it. Vrell
prodded it with a claw and it moved sluggishly.

‘Attend me,’ he hissed in the Prador tongue.

Suddenly the youngster was up on its legs and brandishing its claws
threateningly.

‘Not Father!’ it bubbled.

Knowledge, long ignored as irrelevant during Vrell’s enslavement to his
father’s pheromones, suddenly became relevant. This second-child would still
be similarly enslaved, and to it Vrell was only a competing adult. It would
attack him if it considered him vulnerable, or else escape if it could. Vrell
reached over to a nearby rack and inserted his claw into a large triclaw
extension, then quickly turned and brought it down hard. The polished steel
smashed through the second-child’s legs on one side and knocked it flat to the
ground. As it tried to rise again, Vrell hit it once more, this time pulping
its remaining legs. He then opened the metal claw and used it to tear off the
younger Prador’s claws, before turning round and closing the door manually. He
did not want further interruptions from any more of his kin.

‘Not Father,’ the second-child protested from the floor. Vrell considered
finishing it off, but there might be things to learn from it, so he ignored it
for the present and studied the tools available to him.

The extension he held was too large, so he returned it to the rack and took up
the smallest one he could find. He would have liked to use an anaesthetic on
himself, but then he would be unable to feel what he was grasping. He dipped
the triclaw in a tub of sterilizing grease, closed it, then placed it against
the gory hole where the two leeches had entered at the joint of his missing
claw. There must be no further delay, as they could start feeding again at any
moment. He eased the claw inside himself, tracking the path of one leech by
just how much it hurt him. The path curved round, very near a major ganglion,
and he adjusted the joints in the extension to follow. There was no doubt when
he tracked down the leech, for it thrashed inside him and began chewing to
escape. Vrell opened the claw, shoved it even deeper, closed it and pulled.

Vrell knew how humans, subjected to a sufficient level of pain, could lose
consciousness. He had seen this many times and learnt the various techniques

for preventing it happening. No such luxury was available to himself. He
shrieked as he tore the leech out, hissed at it when he held it up before him,
all bloody and writhing, its tubular thread-cutting mouth still seeking
blindly for flesh. He dropped the vile thing down by the grease tub, picked up
the tub itself and crushed the creature to slurry with it. Then he went after
the other two.

When the last leech was nothing but a stain on the floor, Vrell swapped the
triclaw for a large-bore injector. He fed this inside himself and pumped the
leech-made cavities full of collagen foam and growth promoter. Into the cracks
in the rear of his carapace he injected quickset porcelain. This done, he
found carapace patches of a sufficient size, and stuck them over his other
wounds. Now he felt utterly exhausted and was beginning to settle down to rest
when that hard clamp of hunger returned with renewed intensity. Any kind of
meat would do, but fortuitously Prador had a particular relish for the meat of
their own kind. Vrell decided his hunger more important than any information
he might obtain, so settled down by the carapace of his sibling, broke it open
with the large triclaw, and began eating the contents.

‘Father,’ the Prador second-child kept repeating. ‘Father. Father.’ Until
Vrell devoured its major ganglion.

* * * *

Somewhere a reactor was still functioning, for at last, after days of
searching, Vrell managed to find a power source for the bank of hexagonal
screens before him. He reinserted his remaining hand into a console pit and
called up the ship’s diagnostic programs. Studying the Prador glyphs scrolling
down before him, he soon saw that the missile that had brought down this same
ship had penetrated the hull very near to his father’s—Ebulan’s—sanctum. That
area was now sealed behind airtight doors—the ship’s system reacting to the
damage as it would out in space, though the closed-off area was now flooded
with water rather than open to vacuum. Repair mesh had grown across the upper
hole punched through the hull, and breach sealant had been pumped between
these mesh layers and there crystallized. But where the missile had exploded
from the lower hull, the mesh had failed to connect up, so no breach sealant
had subsequently been pumped in.

Vrell decided that for now, whatever repairs he must make, he would approach
them from inside the ship. Only when he had accomplished as many of those as
feasible would he venture outside, and only then if absolutely necessary. But
those repairs must be made, for he needed access to Ebulan’s sanctum, where
the ship’s centralized controls were located. There were also the adjacent
storerooms to consider, where thrall and control units were stored. But even
inside the ship he must once again enter the water. He shuddered at the
thought. Now being an adult he would not regrow his limbs, and could afford to
lose no more. However, this venture was unavoidable if he were to survive.

Checking screens, he found two sets of doubled blast doors, one of them
accessible from this side of the ship, so he could enter that area without
flooding any more of the vessel. He checked the codes for each of those doors
and memorized them, then swung away to find the required tools. Luckily, he
had entered the ship on the engine side, where most of the maintenance and
repair equipment was stored. He soon found a molecular plasticizer, a
multipurpose welder and cutter, and a couple of hull-metal sheets which he
loaded onto his back. Hopefully there was sufficient hull metal remaining
around the breach that he could form back into place, and these two sheets
would be all he needed. But if that were not so, then he would just have to
make more than one trip, or as many as would be required. He felt a sudden
flash of uncharacteristic irritation about that, then wondered why.

Vrell had never expected this to be easy, but the potential benefits were
huge. He could return to the Prador Kingdom, inherit his father’s wealth, his
father’s property, wives. Strangely, that last thought did not hold its
earlier appeal. Vrell shook himself and continued with his task, hanging the
equipment on his weapons harness. He next went to one of the many armouries to
find a rail-gun that operated underwater, then as an afterthought added a
water gun—a device that sucked in water and spat it out in a superheated
stream. He would have added more weapons, but possessed only one working claw
and one hand to hold them.

The first blast door slid up to reveal a stretch of corridor, empty but for
one human hand which Vrell absent-mindedly picked up and ate. As the second
door slid up he held his breath which, being Prador, he could do for about a
day. Water began to squirt in under pressure, then roared in carrying detritus
with it. Soon submerged, Vrell saw he was surrounded by leeches, and though
they thumped ineffectually against his now sealed shell, he still used the
water gun to explode them into black gobbets of boiled flesh. Moving into his
father’s section of the ship, he immediately saw that something strange had
happened here.

Someone had cut through the door to Father’s private sanctum. Vrell peered
inside, observing a multitude of leeches and whelks, and a couple of glisters
clinging to the ceiling. It took him a moment to discern human bones on the
floor, a shell cutter lying nearby, and pieces of his father’s carapace
scattered all around the room. Vrell stared, and stared, then abruptly
understood. As well as the physical attack on his ship, Vrell’s father had
been assailed by a viral program. Something obviously had suborned Ebulan’s
human blanks and used them to attack him.

He also noted the crushed remnants of juvenile Prador carapaces scattered here
and there. Ebulan must have killed them first, believing there to be a
betrayal from within. The surviving one Vrell had found must have been unable
to move from the hospital area when it was summoned. Vrell turned away to be
about his task, then swung back as the glisters dropped from the ceiling and
sculled towards him. He fired the rail-gun, shattering them and turning the
water within the sanctum cloudy. Leeches and whelks quickly moved in to clear
up the mess, as they must have earlier cleaned the flesh from the human bones
and the meat out of his father’s carapace. Vrell hoped Father had taken a long
time to die.

The hole was large, and the surrounding area had been subjected to a plasma
fire—little remaining but warped and melted metal. As he hoped, the hull metal
was broken open here, and bent down in large jagged sheets. Repair mesh had
extruded from the layers, forming a crumpled tangle in the dark waters below,
but it had been unable to connect. He spent hours cutting it away with the
welder’s plasma setting, then watched it sink to the sea floor five metres
below, where it stirred up silt and sent scuttling the razored disks of prill.
Then he set to work with the plasticizer, softening the hull metal, hauling it
into place and reversing that effect to harden it again. Mesh immediately
began to extrude, but there were still some larger holes to deal with. Roughly
cutting up the sheets he had brought, he manoeuvred them into position and
began to weld. Many hours later he finished and, satisfied the mesh would fill
the remaining holes, decided to return to the unflooded section.

Vrell felt tired as he scrambled through the darkness to the blast doors. His
sealed wounds were now aching and itching, and there seemed a pressure in
them. His tough Prador body was almost immune to any kind of infection, but he
was beginning to wonder if he might have picked up some alien bug. He was
also, he knew, suffering from oxygen deprivation.

The first door opened and he scrambled inside. He then approached the control
panel and tried to get a pump working to extract the water, but it just would
not respond. Angry, he slammed his claw against the wall beside the panel, and
was surprised to see he had left a dent. Suddenly, the area of flesh
underneath the patch over where he had lost his claw began to really hurt.
Never mind the water, then. He input the code to open the second blast door.
Nothing happened for a moment, then his father’s ident glyph appeared on the
hexagonal screen. Vrell realized he had walked into one of the automatic
code-change traps his father had spread throughout his ship. The doors now
would not open unless an override was sent from Ebulan’s sanctum.

Vrell lost it then, smashing the panel and screen with his claw. This
exacerbated the pain radiating from underneath his patches. His legs folded
underneath him and he sank to the floor. It was no use; he was finished.
Sudden weariness washed over him and he began to drift in and out of
consciousness. In one lucid moment he realized this was the result of anoxia,
but he was unable to do anything about it. He was going to suffocate in here.
Blackness swamped his senses.

Time passed, a very great deal of time.

* * * *

‘This has to be the most alien skyscape I’ve seen, yet humans created it,’
said Janer.

He had seen many unusual worlds during his indenture and subsequent voluntary
service to the hive mind. Here, strange weather patterns, due to the
atmosphere’s odd gas mix and aerial algae, divided the sky with cloud layers
in varying shades of blue and green like vast floating isles. And now, at
sunset, a backdrop of half the sky was a veined explosion of indigo, gold and
ruby. The sky alone would have been enough, but there were snairls here as
well.

‘Genfactoring was at its height when humans first came here,’ the mind
observed.

It spoke to him through the hivelink in his right ear. Two hornets, which were
akin to two synapses in the hive mind and were also one facet of its disperse
sensorium, rested in the transparent skin-stick box formed to his shoulder. He
eyed them, noting the circuit patterns on their thoraxes and abdomens. He had
only recently learnt that rather than decoration those patterns were the
exterior evidence of the nanocircuitry linking synapse to synapse by radio,
rather than by slow pheromonal transfer of thoughts as had originally been the
case, for the hive minds had not been averse to benefiting from human
technology. Though for humans it had been a shock to discover that they shared
Earth with hive intelligences carried by hornet swarms—a fact impossible to
accept for some. Even after long familiarity Janer still found the concept
problematic.

Janer returned his attention to the spectacular sky, reached out and wiped
condensation from the curving transparent shell before him, beyond which he
observed a translucent bladder trailing tentacles, swept past by an errant
wind.

‘That was one of the earliest adaptations,’ the mind commented.

Janer nodded. He knew this world’s history. When humans first came here the
place had been choking on its own aerial algae, the ecosystem teetering on the
edge of catastrophe since a volcanic eruption had provided a huge food
resource for those floating diatoms, thus causing their population to explode.
Computer models predicted as a consequence the extinction of all other life
here within five thousand years.

‘Introduced to feed on the algae—an adaptation from the Portuguese man-of-war
jellyfish.’ Janer pointed past the creature to a circling flock of rooks in
the distance. ‘And they were introduced to feed on them when their population
exploded. But in the end they weren’t enough to keep the algal population
down. I know what happened here. If you recollect, I was required by you to
research the history of this place when I first came here indentured to you.’

‘Of course I recollect. The capacity to forget is a purely human trait.’

Janer snorted and peered through the clouds. There: three huge life forms.
Many creatures had been introduced here: alien, Terran, and adaptations of
both. The one that had averted the ecological catastrophe was a splicing of
humble snails, those same floating jellyfish and a couple of alien forms. The
result was snairls.

Floating amid the slate clouds were three behemoth spiral shells like fairy
towers. These supported huge grey-and-white snail bodies that probed the air
with glistening antlers in search of rich masses of the algae on which the
creatures fed.

Snairls hatched from eggs the size of footballs, dropping from the sky like
jelly hail. They fed on the thick ground-slicks of dying algae, growing
aerogel shells that they filled with helium. By the time they were the size of
cows, they achieved buoyancy, and left the ground for richer fields. The
genetic manipulation might have stopped with them had it not become a part of
the very culture of this place. But here the rulers of humanity were the
CGs—Chief Geneticists—and the manipulation continued. Some centuries past, a
CG adapted humans to live in the slimy arteries and cysts inside snairl
bodies. Now these people sailed the skies in their strange craft, trading
genfactored artefacts. They were a long-lived people whose span was delimited
by the life of their host. Janer turned away from his viewpoint within Upper
Shell to observe the gas bags behind him, and to remember.

He had lived with the crew of this very snairl, the Graaf, and been aboard
when it mated with another of its kind, and then died. He had seen the crew
die inside it, and a lover die, and been saved from death himself by the
hornets he then carried. The fleshy body of the Graaf had long since decayed
and dropped away. Now this shell was ballasted, and driven through the sky by
motorized screws attached to the huge shell he stood inside. It was also the
home to hornets. Thousands of nests occupied Lower Shell—ballast being shed as
they increased in number. This shell had seemed a safe haven to this
particular hive mind. Other minds occupied other shells. But for the indigent
and barely human population, this world belonged to the hornets. It was,
inevitably, called Hive.

‘How many shells now?’ Janer asked.

‘One hundred and twenty—all minds older than myself.’

Janer winced. It was well to be reminded that this particular mind—the
youngest—had been around for about ten thousand years. There were many more

even older ones: strange minds seemingly incapable of communicating with
humans, or perhaps just disinclined.

‘Most older minds still keep to Earth, though,’ he observed.

‘It’s what they know, though to me Earth seems more alien than other worlds
I’ve visited.’

‘Yes, we saw many together.’ Janer was starting to get irritated. Over the
last few hours the mind had just been rambling: it wasn’t getting to the
point. The mind must have sensed this, again causing him to wonder just how
close the hivelink keyed in to his thoughts.

‘You are independently wealthy,’ it said.

‘Certainly, and all due to you. But it wasn’t my fault you didn’t establish
nests on Spatterjay. Is that what this is all about? Is that why you called me
here?’

‘Spatterjay,’ the mind repeated.

In the background of that word arose an angry buzzing. Janer knew it to be
mere theatre, since individual hornets might buzz, but the mind itself was a
disperse and not easily definable entity, and it certainly did not make any
noise it did not want to. He considered the strange and lethal world just
named.

Second on Janer’s list of weird places he had visited was Spatterjay. A virus
there toughened human bodies to nigh indestructibility, and there were people
sailing the seas of that world, Old Captains, who had lived perhaps a thousand
years. A strange place. A place where the most valuable commodity for the
Hoopers—as the people there were called—was death. Death came in the form of a
poison obtained at great risk from sea-going leeches the size of whales.
Sprine, they called it. Sprine was what this hive mind had once paid him to
obtain for it, so it could adapt its hornets to carry the stuff in their
stings and thus become the ruler of that world. Their mission had failed.

‘I do hope you’re not expecting to get your money back,’ said Janer, eyeing
the hornets on his shoulder—which gave him at least something to address. ‘The
Earth Central ruling was not open to interpretation. I did what you asked of
me, even though I only did it so we could finally kill that damned skinner
creature. And you were warned that your actions, though they might not be

illegal under human law, would nevertheless not be tolerated.’

‘I do not want my money back,’ the mind sulked.

‘Then what do you want?’

‘Many people infect themselves with immortality,’ the mind told him.

Ah...

‘Yes,’ Janer agreed, ‘Spatterjay has become a big attraction for Polity
citizens. We live in an age when you can choose your route to eternal youth,
and some of those choices become quite esoteric’ Janer mulled that over. In
the Polity, that political unit ruled by artificial intelligences and now
spread across a considerable portion of the galaxy, death could quite often
just be a matter of choice. ‘Are you going after the sprine again?’ he added.
He studied the circular leech scar on the back of his hand through which he
had been infected with the Spatterjay virus. Soon, before that virus started
breaking down inside him and causing him some major problems, he would have to
return to Spatterjay for reinfection. It was thus he himself had been infected
with immortality.

‘I am not.’

‘I’m glad to hear it. For I suspect that, if you were to try, this partial
home of yours might end up subject to an accidental meteor strike. Polity AIs
tend to get a little tetchy when their warnings aren’t heeded.’

‘But someone else is,’ the mind added.

* * * *

‘Due to the lower gravity here and some minor tinkering with the trees’
genome, our redwoods can grow half a kilometre tall,’ explained Hannister, the
tour guide. ‘They reach maturity very quickly—a hundred years—and that is when
they are harvested.’ She turned from gazing up at the forest giants to survey
her party.

Three were not easily identifiable. They were clad in grey enviro-suits, their
faces concealed by domino masks. Two of them also wore short hooded flak
jackets, while the other wore a tighter-fitting long black coat, which was
also hooded. There seemed something unsavoury about them. The rest of the
party consisted of a catadapt, an ophidapt, and five standard-format humans.
The little girl, who was clearly the apple of her parents’ eye while an
all-round pain in the arse to everyone else, was the first to pipe up.

‘But surely that’s not ecologically sound,’ she said in a kid’s voice seeming
to contain a hint of fingernails on blackboard.

‘That would be the case if they were part of the local ecology, but they are
not. Firstly the biota here is incapable of breaking down that quantity of
cellulose, secondly, a falling mature tree often takes others down with it,
and thirdly they are a valuable resource to the economy here.’

‘You make money out of them,’ said the girl.

Hannister hated talking to children, which made her particularly unsuited to
this job. She turned to the rest. ‘Harvesting is also necessary because once
the trees reach maturity they begin to produce viable seed. We do not want any
of that seed germinating outside the plantations.’

‘Because a competitor might acquire seed or saplings,’ said the girl.

Hannister frowned at her, then decided it was about time she checked her aug.
Her augmentation—a piece of computer hardware that nestled behind her ear and
linked into both her brain and into vast informational networks—displayed some
text in her visual cortex:

Smile Pettifor, 8 years solstan, Solsystem Abraxis Station .. .

She did not need to go any further. For a moment she thought the girl might be
one of those people who preferred perpetual childhood to perpetual adulthood.

‘Are we to proceed to a harvesting now?’ hissed the masked individual in the
black coat.

Hannister finally soft-linked to his ident and auged again:

Taylor Bloc, reification incept special request Anubis Arisen, Klader Alpha—

Reif?

Hannister suddenly felt her mouth go dry. She was not entirely clear about the
details. On some world it had been fashionable to reanimate murder victims,
using implanted technology, and send them after the murderers. These
reanimations had possessed no intelligence, merely rough memcordings from
their dead minds and programs to follow. In later years, as memcording from
dead brains was perfected, people could live again. Some of them chose to live
on in their own corpses—some cult had arisen out of it all. Reifications were
high-tech zombies. Hannister felt it all very well for her to be showing
around adapted humans, and brats, but she was not sure how she felt about
acting as a tour guide to the dead. It was then she recognized a slight whiff
of spoilt meat and realized it had been in the air all along.

‘Drave, do you know there are reifications in my group?’ she sent.

Drave replied: ‘Yes, I do, and, being as they are buying a whole tree from us,
I suggest you treat them with the utmost consideration.’

‘Shall we move on?’ said Hannister, smiling.

They rode up on a supervisor’s platform to observe the harvesting. Other
platforms, holding other tour groups, hovered in the forest nearby. Hannister
gazed at the arboreal giants all around and felt a familiar loosening in her
chest. They were awesome, and she was part of all this. Glancing back to her
group she felt a flash of irritation. The tourists were surrounded by all this
yet they were waiting to be entertained. She stooped and opened the locker to
one side of the platform’s control column and began passing round disposable
image intensifiers, glad they would not be returned because no way was she
again handling the ones the reifs took.

‘Here comes the stripper,’ Hannister said, raising her intensifier to her
eyes.

The drone dropping out of the lemon-stained sky bore the appearance of a giant
horse fly, though it lacked wings. It homed in on the tree like that same
insect sniffing bare skin, landed hard, low on the trunk, driving in the piton
feet of its lower four legs. Its forelimbs remained free, and at the tips of
them something glittered and blurred into motion—chainglass saws.

‘This design of drone is optimum for the task. We’ve learnt that over the
years,’ Hannister told them.

‘Why chainglass?’ asked one of the normal humans.

‘Any kind of directed energy is a fire risk, and not very efficient.
Chainglass cuts clean, keeps its edge for a very long time, and is cheap to
replace.’

The drone began climbing, its pace constant as it reached and severed each
branch close to the trunk, though its course necessarily spiralled to take it
to every branch. Sawdust snowed down, coating both the drone and the ground
below. Falling branches slammed into it, but it continued inexorably. Quickly
reaching a point where the trunk was no wider than the branches sprouting from
it, the drone cut around twice, and the upper section of the tree toppled.
Hannister glanced down to watch treaded handlers with large spidery claws
coming in to take up great piles of branches and cart them away for processing
into paper. Another device sucked up the fallen sawdust. Nothing was wasted.

The drone then descended to the ground and waited, as around it the handlers
soon cleared away all the remaining rubbish.

‘Now the carrier.’ Hannister pointed.

The machine now descending from the sky was a hundred-metre grey cylinder with
fins down its entire length on one side, to cool its heavy-duty gravmotors,
and with wide pincer clamps down the other side. It was utterly functional. It
dropped parallel to the trunk, and closed its three clamps on the wood.
Immediately the horse fly began cutting, two fountains of sawdust spraying
from where its forelimbs entered the tree’s bole. The tree tottered, and they
all heard the humming of the carrier’s gravmotors as it took up nearly a
thousand tonnes weight of wood. Slowly, tree and carrier rose into the sky.

‘Now it goes to the sawmill, to be cut up—usually into all sorts of
shapes already designated by the numerous customers who have bought
Probably, that trunk will be turned into many thousands of items of
planking, panelling, grips for knives or guns, wooden dice or toys.
cubic centimetre of wood will be wasted,’ said Hannister.

‘That is not precisely the case here.’

wooden
the tree.
furniture,
Not one

Hannister glanced round, auging at the same time. Taylor Bloc, the one who had
spoken, removed his mask with a slight sucking sound and pulled back his hood
to observe her. She bit down on the gasp. One side of the reification’s face
was worn down to bone, his teeth exposed on that side in a perpetual grin. In
that same side’s eye-socket, surprisingly, there remained an apparently alive
but unlidded eye. The revealed skull above was translucent, showing liquid
movement and the occasional glint of optics. The other side of his skull was
clad in grey wrinkled skin, and his other brown eye retained its eyelid.
Strangely, the reif seemed to be wearing silver spectacles—something Hannister
had only ever seen in historical entertainments. She realized her mistake when
a fine mist sprayed from the frames to moisten his eyeballs. From the
spectacles themselves, where they hooked behind the ragged ear on the left
side of his head, a pipe ran down, stapled to his neck, and into the collar of
his envirosuit. He shrugged, as if accepting that he was hideous. Probably
because of the spectacle-frame irrigator, he seemed to Hannister horribly,
almost super-naturally, studious.

After a couple of attempts at speaking, she managed, ‘What is the case here,
then?’

‘Nothing will be wasted, as you say, but your sawmill will cut whole from this
trunk a ship’s keel and, from the remainder, its ribs and many other necessary
items. The hull planking for our project we will obtain from yanwood and
peartrunk trees.’

‘Ship?’

‘On Sable Keech I will bring my kind to the Little Flint. Some of them, if
they are worthy, will become the Arisen, as did he for whom the ship will be
named.’

‘Right, right okay,’ Hannister just let that lunacy go and instead eyed the
little girl called Smile, who was holding her nose. ‘Let’s move on, shall we?’

* * * *

1

Spatterjay Virus:
many questions surround this virus and its relationship with the leeches, and

few of them can be answered. There is little fossil evidence of leeches, for
obvious reasons, and that of viral growth in other life forms tells us only
when it began to appear, and then only to the nearest hundred million years.
Genetic archaeology is also of little use, since the virus is an eclectic
collector of Spatterjay’s equivalent of DNA from the planet’s biosphere.

Terran viruses, upon entering a cell, propagate from it and destroy it in the
process. The Spatterjay virus roots in it and grows as a fibre to other cells,
gradually networking the host body in a fibrous mass. These cells are then
maintained perpetually. But the virus also engineers the DNA. Should the
animal be damaged, or its environment change, the virus will alter its host to
the optimum for survival in those circumstances. An animal can have its head
cut off and yet not die; the virus will stimulate it to grow the necessities
of survival. The usual result of this is the body growing a leech’s
plug-cutting mouth, probably because the bulk of additional DNA the virus
carries is of the leech, its original host. In this manner the virally
infected prey become a perpetually reusable food resource for the leeches
themselves. So it would seem that when the virus appeared, the leeches swiftly
took advantage of it.

Humans, being ill-suited to Spatterjay’s biosphere, are quickly adapted by the
virus, unless they take preventive measures. Hoopers stave off the ‘change’ by
eating Terran foods which, lacking in nutrition for the virus, very much slow
its growth. Drugs such as Intertox also inhibit it. Without these, humans can
change into chimerical creatures that are a random combination of Spatterjay
animals. Evolutionary effects of the virus on native life are most ably
demonstrated in teleost forms such as the turbul -

Ambel listened to the wind in the sail and wondered if the rhinoworm steaks
the creature had just eaten might be on the turn. The veined pink sheets of
the living sail’s wings were spread in the spars of the Treader, stiffened by
its spines and ropes of muscle. It gripped wood with numerous spidery claws at
the ends of these spines, and its neck was wound once around the mast, its
crocodilian head poised a couple of metres above the deck. It looked
contemplative as it turned the mast on the static spar, thus turning the other
two masts via mechanisms in the body of the ship. Or perhaps that look was
dyspepsia?

‘You all right there, sail?’ he asked.

The sail turned its demonic red eyes towards him. ‘I’m fine,’ it grated. ‘And
the name is Gale . . . catcher?’ It shook its head. Obviously it still could
not grasp the new name issued to it by the Boss. But then, barring the Boss
himself, it had, like all the other sails, borne for many years the name
Windcatcher. Centuries ago these huge batlike creatures of this world had
possessed enough intelligence to learn human language and make themselves
useful to humans by actually taking the place of fabric sails on ocean-going
ships, thus benefiting from food supplied by the humans, but the concept of

names ever evaded them. Now, one very intelligent sail was changing all that.
Their wages had changed too.

‘Don’t seem right,’ Peck muttered from just behind Ambel’s left shoulder.

‘I think I warned you, Peck,’ said Ambel mildly.

‘Sorry,’ said the ship’s mechanic.

Ambel glanced at him. The man’s appearance was unchanged: bald head, weird
green eyes the hue of the sky above them, the long hide coat he preferred, and
filthy canvas trousers, but in other ways he just got stranger as he got
older. His latest odd habit was to quietly creep up behind people to abruptly
issue his gripes. It was annoying for many, which was why Ambel had given him
a warning earlier. The Captain himself was past such little irritations. You
don’t recover from being a stripped fish and still allow someone like Peck to
get under your skin, so to speak.

‘Go and grease your ratchets,’ Ambel added, then returned his attention to the
sail. ‘Your name, if you recollect, is Galegrabber.’

The sail blinked at him, and mumbled in a decidedly Peckish way.

Ambel let that go. ‘How far to Olian’s, do you think?’ he asked instead.

The sail lifted its head higher, until it was almost past its own body, peered
into the distance for a while, then returned to Ambel’s level.

‘Twenty-two point six five kilometres.’

Ambel eyed the creature then turned to head back to his cabin. Could not
remember its own name, yet Galegrabber had a mind like a computer when it came
to anything involving figures. But then maybe the small black aug attached
behind its ear hole was configured for that. Ambel opened his cabin door and
stepped inside.

After they had dragged the Treader out of the jungle on the Skinner’s Island,
where it had been thrown by the massive explosion intended to kill all the Old

Captains—being witnesses to the Prador Ebulan’s long-ago crimes—it had taken
Ambel a few years to lose the creepy feeling he got every time he entered his
own cabin. His sea chest was still there against the wall, a little battered
but intact. However, that chest no longer contained anything nasty. The living
Skinner’s head, which once resided in a box inside the chest, was dead along
with the rest of the monster the erstwhile pirate Jay Hoop had become.

Ambel sighed and dropped into his reinforced chair. So many events back then,
but already they were being buried under the trammelling years. It was the
understanding that this was always the way of things that he tried to impart
to Erlin, to help her through her crisis of ennui—something all those who
might live forever faced at about their two hundredth year. He hoped to have
succeeded, hoped she would not kill herself out of boredom. He still loved
her, though considered her rather impetuous and inclined to drama. Youngsters.

Her recent expedition was a further sign of what Ambel considered her
immaturity. He had dropped her off on an island where ostensibly she intended
to study some of the local homicidal molluscs, but really she ‘needed to
think’. Maybe she intended to kill herself, but if that was her intention
Ambel would not stop her—he didn’t have the right—and probably could not
anyway if her intention was serious. He would find out soon enough. After
making a deposit at Olian’s, he was going back for her. She had been on that
island for about a year, so her supplies of dome-grown food must be running
out, and he didn’t want to risk her turning into another skinner. Shaking his
head he turned to his charts.

An hour later there came a recognizably tuneful knock at his cabin door.

‘What is it, Sprout?’ he asked.

There was a pause while Sprout, not the sharpest gut-knife in the box, tried
to figure out how Ambel knew who was knocking. Then the man said, ‘Comin’ up
on the island now, Captain.’

Ambel stepped back out of his cabin, glanced at Sprout—a short thickset man
with dyed purple hair tied in a ponytail; lip ring, nose ring and ring in his
left ear all joined by a chain; and wearing a long brown leather coat over his
canvas Hooper clothing. Sprout also wore an aug, which accounted for his
facial mutilations and the dye job. He had found the look on some historical
site, and been much attracted to it. He was not the only one either: body
piercing was becoming quite the fashion amongst the younger Hoopers. Ambel
felt that wasn’t healthy for a people whose relationship with pain was
questionable at best. He now turned his attention to Olian Tay’s island.

Some years ago the approach here had been difficult because of the packetworm
reefs surrounding it. Now channels had been cut through many of them, large

bubble-metal jetties extended from the beaches and smaller pearwood jetties
branched off from those. Many Hooper ships and boats were moored here and, as
the Treader drew in, Hoopers waved and called from their decks. Ambel smelt
the tobacco smoke before he spotted Captain Sprage on the deck of the
Vengeance, chair tilted back and pipe firmly clamped in his mouth. Sprage
nodded and Ambel raised a hand. They had a history together, but then so did
most Old Captains, most of them having lived for over five centuries in this
same area of the same world. Ambel saw a new Captain, Lember, who at one time
had been Sprage’s bosun. He saw Cormarel and Tranbit. The first of these
Captains was unnaturally tall and long-limbed due to a lack of dome-grown food
in his past, resulting in a near skinnerlike transformation, and the last, a
squat wide man with red skin in which the blue leech scars seemed to gleam
like silver. Utterly different in appearance, yet the firmest of friends. Many
other Hoopers unloaded cargoes, loaded supplies, chatted, worked on their
ships, sat on the jetties fishing for boxies and swearing at their bait, or
gathered in groups to crack open barrels of sea-cane rum. Ambel smelt roasting
glister, and heard the thumping of hammer whelks trying to escape the
cauldrons in which they were being boiled. He eyed someone searing turbul
steaks on a hotplate, then caught the eye-watering stench of someone emptying
a slops bucket over a ship’s side.

And the Treader drew in to dock.

* * * *

The gleaming metal nautilus, three metres in diameter, its grasping tentacles
neatly folded and its head withdrawn inside, was a drone shell. A bubble-metal
framework held it upright, and it had been carefully wrapped in translucent
shockfoam sheeting. Studying the spaceship’s manifest, Captain Ron wondered
why anyone had bothered with the wrapping, since the damned thing was made of
a highly advanced ceramal and diamond fibre composite, and plated with
nanochain chromium. Working with a sledgehammer for the next decade, Ron would
hardly manage to scratch its surface, and the Old Captain could do more damage
with his fists than any normal human could do with such a hammer.

‘Who’s it for?’ he asked casually.

‘The Warden,’ Forlam replied.

‘Ah . . . figures,’ said Ron.

Ron was built like a piece of earth-moving equipment: slabs of muscle shifted
underneath his silk shirt, his hands were like spades, his legs pillars, and
he stood solid as a boulder. Unlike Ron, Forlam possessed a head of hair, and
was wiry. He was as tough as seasoned oak, and wore the expression of someone
perpetually on the edge of needing cerebral adjustment or confinement to an

asylum. Both men bore a slight blue tint to their skins. Both men were covered
with circular scars, though in Ron’s case there were so many that he appeared
mottled, almost scaly.

‘Not our most unusual cargo,’ Forlam added.

Ron eyed him. ‘We have a usual cargo?’

Forlam gave a wincing shrug.

Since Ron had taken on the Captaincy of the Gurnard they had visited many
worlds inside and outside the Polity, and hauled everything from components
for the Cassius Dyson sphere to genfactored replacement bodies in the shape of
mythical beasts. Ron’s particular favourite had been the live cargo of a
creature called a ‘gabbleduck’, which had been restrained by composite chains
equally as strong as the material in this drone shell, to prevent it breaking
free and eating the crew. All it had done though was sit in the hold: a huge
pyramid of flesh with too many arms, topped with a domed head wrapped in a
tiara of greenish eyes and sporting a large duck bill, eating the food
provided and speaking nonsense that always seemed on the edge of making sense.
Ron knew there was a lot more oddities for him to see and other interesting
cargoes to haul, but it felt good to be going home. He moved on down the hold
with Forlam trailing behind him.

‘What else have we got here?’ he asked, eyeing his notescreen manifest.

‘A really big lump of wood,’ replied Forlam. ‘I think you’ll know what it is
as soon as you see it.’

‘I’ll be buggered,’ Ron later said, while eyeing the huge ship’s keel they had
transported to Spatterjay.

* * * *

By all Polity definitions Taylor Bloc knew he was an AI: the memcording of the
man running entirely in crystal. That cyber mechanisms moved his dead and
chemically preserved body was irrelevant for definition. But he retained his
flesh, his skeleton, and his own peculiar belief in resurrection. Bloc’s
beliefs ran contrary to those of others and, as always, they were trying to
thwart him. He was angry, he was always angry.

In the embarkation lounge on Coram, the moon of Spatterjay, he walked jerkily
around a bumbling beetle-bot that was meticulously polishing the floor, and
stepped into a private conferencing booth, where he removed his mask and slid
back his hood.

‘I must speak to the Warden,’ he said succinctly, as soon as he saw that the
privacy field had come on.

‘Hello, dead man,’ said a submind.

Bloc was momentarily taken aback. After a pause he went on, ‘I said, I want to
speak to the Warden.’

‘Can do, but I warn you he’s not the soul of patience nowadays—not that he
ever was.’

‘Okay, I’ve got it now, Seven. What do you want, Bloc?’

‘I’ve been informed that my cargo is not to be delivered to its intended
destination.’

‘Yeah, no shit?’ replied a bored voice.

‘That is breach of contract.’

‘Spatterjay is not a Polity world, reif. You don’t talk to me, you talk to the
Boss.’

‘Boss?’ Bloc paused, then continued regardless, ‘The agreement was that we
would lay the keel on Chel—the Embassy Island.’ He blinked and his spectacle
irrigator started working. He shut it down and his constant internal
diagnosticer immediately threw up the message in his visual cortex: IRRIG @@#*
SHUT??DOWN. Such corruptions were the inevitable result of the additional
hardware his dead body now contained, but still it took him a moment to
register what the Warden said next.

‘What?’

‘I said: have you got that in writing?’ the Warden repeated.

‘I can send you the package right now.’

‘I mean, have you got that in writing on paper signed by both parties?’

‘Paper?’

‘That’s how it’s done down on the surface. Now, why don’t you get yourself and
your friends down there—you’re stinking up my base.’

Bloc took a step back. No AI had ever spoken to him like that before, though
admittedly his experience of them was deliberately limited, as there were
certain things about himself, and his companions, best kept secret from the
artificial intelligences that ruled the Human Polity.

‘I am not... stinking,’ he said carefully. ‘My anosmic receptors are the most
advanced, and I would have detected—’

‘Too late, Blocky boy. Old Sniper ain’t got much of an attention span.’

‘Sniper?’

The conferencing booth shut down and the privacy field turned off. Bloc
stepped out backwards, then turned to his two companions. ‘We have to speak to
the “Boss” apparently,’ he said.

Aesop replied, ‘That means we have to go down to the surface and take a ride
on a ferry.’

‘Ferry?’ Bloc repeated.

‘No antigravity transport is allowed on the surface,’ Aesop continued. He and

Bones remained securely masked and hooded, as Bloc had decided that to be
best. Although he felt their kind should not have to hide themselves from the
rest of humanity, the appearance of his two reified companions tended to draw
more unwanted attention than even he himself.

‘No AG transport,’ Bloc repeated stupidly.

Aesop and Bones obeyed orders and provided information when it was lacking,
but they were never solicitous in such service. Aesop said flatly, ‘If you
recollect, that is why we chose to build a ship, for the mass transportation
of reifications and amniotic tanks. It is also to be a monument to the Arisen
One, and yourself of course.’

IRRIG. WARN: CELLULAR DAMAGE IMMINENT

Bloc turned his irrigator back on. He eyed his two companions through the
spray, and his mind started working properly again.

‘Thank you, Aesop, I recollect precisely,’ he said, and began leading the way
to where the planetary shuttles docked. He showed no sign of his earlier
confusion, and now showed none of his present chagrin, which was easy enough
when you were dead. But something was wrong. That glitch with his irrigator
warning was a familiar one, but his memory lapse was something new, for Bloc’s
memory had been perfect for two hundred years, ever since Bones and Aesop had
murdered him back on his home world.

* * * *

As the door to the coldsleep coffin crumped open before him, and as the
feeling began painfully returning to his limbs, Janer told himself, ‘Never
again.’

The mind had not wanted him to come here via the runcible for three good
reasons. Something he was carrying came under the weapons proscription—which
prevented travellers carrying arms above a certain power level through that
same matter transmitter. Secondly, the ruler of Spatterjay might object to him
coming here with hornets, and so block him. And, lastly, the mind did not want
any Polity AIs nosing in on its business, since this was a private matter
between hive minds.

‘You brought them buggers back with you?’ said a familiar voice.

‘Ron? Captain Ron?’

Establishing control over his limbs, Janer took a shaky step from the cold
coffin. Cryogenic Storage was a chamber ringed with upright coffins similar to
his own. The Old Captain was stooping over one of the cryocases stacked
haphazardly in the centre of the room. He appeared little different to how
Janer remembered him: bald-headed, leech-scarred and massive. He stood upright
and grinned.

‘What the hell are you doing aboard?’ Janer asked.

‘I’m the Captain.’

‘I know that, but why are you aboard this old lugger?’

‘I’m the Captain of this old lugger.’

As far as Janer understood it, captaining a sailing vessel on the surface of
Spatterjay did not qualify one to run a spaceship. Numerous questions came to
mind, but all he managed was, ‘Uh?’

‘Been looking around for a few years,’ Ron added unhelpfully.

Janer turned to a nearby dispenser and took from it a disposable coverall. He
then punched in for a hot coffee before donning the garment. This gave him
time to get his thoughts in order. After sipping coffee he couched his
question.

‘How come you have the know-how to run one of these?’ He gestured about him
with the cup, spilling coffee.

‘Oh, I learnt all this stuff years ago, just never had the money to buy
passage off-planet. But things have changed under the Boss, and now Hoopers
can afford more than their next sack of dome-grown grub.’

Years ago.

Of course, that was it about the Old Captains: they were old. Ron had lived on
Spatterjay for a very long time. Knowledge had always been accessible to him,
if the means of employing it had not, since this world had been visited by
space travellers for long before the runcible was set up here over two
centuries ago. How much knowledge could you pack into your skull over such a
period of time? Maybe, to Ron, the complexities of space travel were not too
much of a bother. Then Janer remembered something else: Ron had fought in the
Prador War. Perhaps he had known how to run spaceships even before coming
here, the best part of a thousand years ago.

‘You’ve been on a trade route between here and somewhere else?’ Janer asked.

‘Nah, more of a circuit.’ He beckoned to Janer. ‘Come on.’

‘And it’s brought you back here?’

‘No, lad. I arranged it like that.’

‘Why?’

Ron glanced at him. ‘I want to go home. Still got a mug down there with my
name on it, and I got a ten-year thirst on me.’

Janer felt his head twinge almost warningly. He remembered drinking sea-cane
rum—well, remembered starting to drink it. After a certain point things had
become rather fuzzy.

He paused at the door, gesturing back to the cryocases. ‘The hornets . . .’

‘They’ll be fine. I’ll bring ‘em down with the cargo I have to deliver. And
you can come down with me too. You’re our only human passenger.’

Janer didn’t respond to the slight query in the Captain’s voice.

Ron added, ‘Don’t get many passengers, not inside the runcible network.’

Janer didn’t rise to that either.

* * * *

Only when Erlin moved the underwater remote eye, for a better view of the
colony, was it attacked by leeches that had soon forgotten the device was no
source of meat, so she was glad to have found this rocky marine peak to which
it could cling with its three sharp legs. Not that leeches could damage the
device, but when they swarmed they did tend to block her view of the
ostensible reason for her being here.

The whelks were all of a similar size and bore near-identical shell markings.
Each spiral shell was about half a metre from base to tip, pyramidal, and
glittering with whorls of iridescence. Sitting in the mouth of her temporary
home—it was Polity technology: the kind that could be inflated in minutes and,
when ballasted, stood as solid and impenetrable as a stone house—Erlin gazed
at the image on her fold-up screen, remaining perplexed and fed up. These
molluscs were neither frog nor hammer whelks, and were actually quite boring.
Her gaze wandered from the screen. Boredom, if she was to acquire that ‘long
habit of living’ to which Ambel often referred, was something she must avoid.
She felt the black pit of ennui at her core, robbing her of volition and
threatening to spill out. With almost a physical wrench she forced her
attention back to the screen.

She had expected to move the eye, following the whelks’ migration around the
island or deeper into the ocean, but they remained exactly in the same
location. She had expected to see a lot more activity than this. Other whelk
species were always hunting for food or trying very hard not to become food,
and even though they were the sexually immature version of a larger deep-sea
whelk, they manoeuvred in elaborate social pecking orders. The only sign of
movement from these creatures was when small leeches, glisters or prill came
too close. Then they snapped out squidlike tentacles to drag those creatures
down and eat them. That was all they did: fed and sat and grew. She closed
down the screen. The damned things had done nothing else for a whole year,
which was why Erlin had tried to occupy herself with other studies on the
island.

When she had arrived, the leech population was low and no individual leech
longer than her finger. It seemed some event had denuded the island of
anything larger than this prior to her arrival. Now those fingerlings were
about the size of her arm, though there were fewer of them, and they fed upon
small heirodonts creeping through the vegetation (she could hear their screams
in the night).There had once been big heirodonts here, too—their bones were
mounded on the beach, so obviously the same event that had cleared this place
of bigger leeches had done for them as well, though why their bones were piled
up she did not know. It frustrated her that she could not put together all the
pieces of the puzzle: the leeches, the bones, the shattered peartrunk trees on

either side of a lane of destruction driven over the middle of the island.
Maybe some kind of storm? Maybe some kind of outside interference by humans,
or even by the Warden? Whatever, she certainly intended to solve at least one
puzzle before Ambel returned for her. And to do so she only needed to risk her
life.

Erlin did not like invasive studies, but it was time for her to discover what
was going on with that colony of whelks. Her various scans had been
inconclusive, but then her equipment here was limited. She needed one of those
creatures here, on the surgical table she had erected in her abode, so she
could dissect it to divine the function of its parts. She opened up the screen
again.

The camera had moved. It had been doing that a lot lately. Maybe an earth
tremor, though she had felt none, or maybe it was malfunctioning. Making
adjustments she brought the colony back into view. It seemed closer now, which
was ridiculous. She closed up the screen, stood and, stepping back inside,
placed the device on a rough table she had fashioned from peartrunk wood. From
her sea chest she removed her diving suit and donned it. The thing was
heavy—two layers of monofilament fabric sandwiching ceramal chain mail—but it
was what you needed if you ever wanted to take a swim here and remain intact.
Her haemolung breather would give her three hours underwater before its cells
of artificial haemoglobin became overloaded. More than enough time, now she
had resolved the difficulty in getting one of the creatures ashore. To that
end she had made some additions to her harpoon gun. Now, when the barbed point
penetrated shell and delivered the specially tailored nerve agent, airbags
would inflate on the haft, dragging the chosen whelk to the surface. Then all
she had to do was drag it ashore. Picking up her equipment she headed off.

The beach here was stony, consisting of agates, rounded nodules of rose quartz
and bullets of chert. At the tide line she donned the haemolung, mask and
flippers, took up her harpoon gun and, without more ado, entered the waves.
Immediately leeches started to thud into her, their grinding tubular
mouthparts trying to penetrate her suit. She ignored them, kept going till
submerged. In a short while the attacks ceased; each nearby leech having
ascertained that she must be a large crustacean like a glister.

Ten metres out, the bottom dropped sharply. She sculled slowly down into the
murk, soon locating the peak to which her camera eye clung. Circling this she
spotted an iridescent gleam to the gutlike rolls of stone which she had not
noticed before. Soon she was above the whelks—out of tentacle range. Something
shifted, a current shoved her sideways. Earth tremor? No, just the current.
She aimed down at one of the whelks and fired. The harpoon chopped into its
shell and the airbags expanded. Trailing a cloud of yellow ichor the creature
rose to the surface with its tentacles clenched up inside it, the nerve agent
having done its work. Erlin rose with it and swam quickly ashore, towing it
behind by the harpoon’s monofilament. After detaching the harpoon’s barb, she
rolled the creature through the shallows to the beach. A momentary pang of
guilt touched her, but she dismissed it. These were primitive molluscs of a
kind she had been eating, nicely broiled and dunked in spiced vinegar, for
years.

Once ashore she stooped and picked up the mollusc, acknowledging to herself
that without the changes the Spatterjay virus had wrought in her body, the
creature would be too heavy to manage. Back in her abode she dumped it on the
surgical table, then began removing her gear. From the sea she heard a huge
splash, and peering out observed a disturbance in the water above the colony.
Glisters probably—on tasting the ichor in the water. Returning to the table
she placed a camera eye over it before getting to work. She used her
vibroscalpel to slice from tip to base around the shell, then her Hooper
muscles to pull the two halves apart. The shell, she saw, was surprisingly
thin. The creature inside was octupoidal, and opening it up she saw it also
possessed much the same anatomy as a frog whelk. Another huge splash from
outside. Erlin stepped over and flipped up her screen, but it showed nothing
but underwater murk. She returned to her dissection.

The creature seemed ill-formed—soft and immature—and she could not find its
nascent sexual organs. That was very odd as, being this size, it should at
least be approaching adulthood. Perhaps she had stumbled on an aberrant colony
of mutants. Or perhaps these were whelks affected by some agent, some
pollutant. It had happened on Earth a long time ago: creatures similar to this
changing their sexual characteristics because of pollution by human
birth-control chemicals or antifouling paints on boats. Some there now were
also genfactored to grow simply as meat and so did not require sex organs. But
here the process could not have been initiated by humans; there just were not
enough of them, and their society was not sufficiently industrialized to
affect their environment. Maybe some connection with whatever had happened
here on this island? Erlin allowed her attention to stray back to her screen,
and for a moment just could not fathom what she was seeing. Then the view came
clear. She was now looking at her own dwelling, viewed from a point out at sea
and some metres above the water.

Erlin stepped to the doorway and gaped. A year of navel-gazing had obviously
rotted her brain. The tip of an enormous pyramidal spiral shell was now two
metres above the waves, her camera eye still clinging in place on its tip. Of
course, frog and hammer whelks were adolescent by the time they reached the
size of the one on the table, which it now appeared was the juvenile of a very
different and much larger species. She had not been studying a colony, but a
brood of creatures that were a magnitude larger than the oldest whelk of the
other kind.

And now the mother whelk was coming ashore after one of her missing offspring.

* * * *

2

Frog Whelk:
this whelk’s cartoonish appearance belies its voracity. Its shell is much like
that of a Terran whelk, and it has a single powerful foot that can launch it
long distances when on land (there is nowhere on Spatterjay safe from these
creatures). But seeing a flock of these creatures with their stalked eyes
extended can be an amusing sight. The complex grinding and slicing mouth which
it can extrude from underneath is not so amusing however. The adult whelks are
large and dangerous, but are not often seen, as they inhabit the deep ocean
trenches. After mating, the female lays a cluster of eggs which float slowly
to the surface to hatch. The young whelks, no larger than the tip of a finger,
which survive to reach an island’s shallows herd together for protection from
larger predators, but they also hunt in packs. As they grow, they begin moving
out of the shallows and down to the trenches. Very few survive the journey
there through the awaiting pods of glisters and packs of hammer whelks, fewer
still survive the attentions of their much larger kin: Whelkus titanicus -

Sprout and two others leapt ashore to wrap kelp-fibre ropes around gleaming
bubble-metal bollards. Anne and Boris shortly joined them, hauling on the
ropes to bring the Treader up against the jetty, while the three
youngsters—not yet as strong as the two older crew and incapable of such a
feat—took up the slack and finally tied off the ropes. Grumbling to himself,
Peck lowered the gangplank, then stood staring suspiciously inshore. Peck had
a bit of a thing about islands, but then some particularly horrible things had
happened to him on one particular island. Carrying a box hung by a strap from
his shoulder, Ambel slapped Peck on the shoulder and stepped past him.

‘Come on, Peck. The only skinners here are fish skinners,’ he said.

Ambel then turned to peer up at Galegrabber, who was waiting expectantly. He
reached into his pocket and took out a roll of notes, unfolded a couple and
eyed the picture of a sail’s head on them, before holding them up. Galegrabber
reached down a spider claw, delicately took the notes then secreted them
somewhere about its person.

‘That completes this contract,’ said Ambel. ‘But we’ll be sailing again,’
Ambel gazed towards the lemon-yellow sun nestling in jade clouds on the
horizon, ‘in the morning, so if you want to take on some more work . . .’ The
Captain shrugged.

The sail swung its head round to stare out to sea, where rhinoworms were
exuberantly hunting whelks and leeches amid the remaining reefs. ‘I’ll grab a
bite and get back to you.’

The creature now released its spiderclaw holds in the spars, drew in its

veined translucent wings and, like a giant spider tangled in sheets of pink
cloth, hauled itself to the masthead. There, with a dull thumping, it spread
its wings again and launched into the sky. Ambel turned to the gangplank and
stepped down.

Ten years ago, Olian Tay had lived alone on this island in her tower, adding
to her black museum and researching the past crimes of the Eight—Jay Hoop and
his pirate crew who, based here on Spatterjay, had terrorized this sector of
space for nearly two centuries, before moving on to kidnapping and coring
humans to sell to the Prador during that long-ago war. Some years ago she had
expected to make a small fortune on Earth by displaying two items that had
come into her possession, but before she could commit herself to the journey,
things changed very rapidly on Spatterjay.

The increasing influx of Polity citizens in search of novel immortality
brought with it a flood of wealth. Windcheater, the brightest of the living
sails, had risen to power because he was both politically adept and
financially acute. He knew the old currency of Spatterjay, based only on
equivalency, needed to be replaced with currency based on something of genuine
value to the larger human population. Gems there were aplenty, but to Hoopers,
who until recent years despised personal decoration, they were worth only as
much as they could be sold for to a Polity citizen. Polity citizens, moreover,
being able to obtain manufactured diamonds, rubies, emeralds and many others,
were only interested in rarities: unique gems like some types of fossilized
wood or opalized skulls, of which the supply was limited. Windcheater toyed
briefly with basing a currency on artefacts remaining from the time of the
Eight but, again, not enough of them were available. Then he had his brilliant
idea.

The immortal and practically indestructible Hoopers valued one thing above
anything else, something they rarely used yet always coveted: the poison
sprine and the quick (though messy) death it could impart. Windcheater based
his new currency on sprine. The fifty New Skind banknote thus promised to pay
the bearer one death measure of sprine. But where to keep the gathered sprine
safe from nefarious Hoopers, and from those that might want to control
Hoopers? Olian Tay made her fortune because she was the only individual on the
planet with a secure vault, around which she established Olian’s: the first
planetary bank of Spatterjay.

Strolling along the walkway leading from the jetties into the island, Ambel
gazed ahead at cleared dingle and the new structures built there and being
built. Olian’s tower stood at the centre of this, but now a long low building
led to it. Anyone coming to the bank must now enter through her museum and get
to know something of Spatterjay’s past.

‘I’ll bugger off now,’ said Peck. ‘Any chance I can have mine now?’

Ambel nodded, took out his cash roll and counted out Peck’s wages. ‘Any of the

rest of you?’ Sild and Sprout took their payments, as did other crew members;
only Anne and Boris stayed with Ambel to enter the museum. Over his shoulder
Ambel told those departing, ‘First thing in the morning. No excuses.’

The life-size and lifelike statue just inside the door was the reason Peck did
not enjoy this place. The Skinner loomed four metres tall over the entryway:
his skin was blue, he was famine thin and possessed spidery grasping hands.
His head was monstrous: hoglike and bony under taut-stretched parchment skin.
The Skinner, which had lived up to its name in Peck’s case. Ambel moved on,
viewing display cases containing skeletons with spider thralls attached at the
backs of their necks, or with skulls open to show deeper thralls installed
after coring to replace the human brain removed. Other skeletons were weirdly
distorted, showing the initial stages of viral mutation which if it had been
allowed to go on long enough would have resulted in the statue by the door.
There were slave collars, weapons, mounds of personal belongings—all that
remained of the millions of humans who had been processed here nearly a
millennium ago. He came eventually to single cases containing models of the
infamous Eight: the Talsca twins, Jay Hoop as he had looked before his
transformation into the Skinner . . . and Ambel himself when he had been Balem
Gosk, before the Old Captains threw him into the sea to lose most of his body
and, throughout an eternity of agony, his mind as well. Two models only were
missing from the set.

Chainglass pillars on either side of the bank’s entrance contained Rebecca
Frisk and David Grenant, but these were the real thing: unable to die because
of their tough Hooper bodies, unable to live because of their imprisonment and
lack of nutrition and oxygen. Olian, on special occasions, fed them small
supplies of both so that they could then hammer at the impenetrable walls of
their containers and mouth screams through the preserving fluid in which they
floated.

In the bank foyer, Olian Tay sat behind her desk working a console and screen.
Two large Hoopers and two large skinless Golem stood to either side of her.
The Hoopers eyed Ambel warily, knowing that if he caused any problems the four
of them might not be enough to restrain him. Ambel studied the Golem, which
stood there like silver skeletons. They were products of Polity technology:
androids manufactured by Cybercorp, and here deliberately lacking their
syntheflesh coverings so as to appear more threatening. He was not going to be
a problem, though. With Boris and Anne standing at each shoulder, he took the
seat opposite Olian and placed his box on the table.

‘Captain Ambel,’ began Olian, ‘always a pleasure. How is the lovely Erlin, and
how is your crew?’ Before he could answer she went on. ‘And how is Crewman
Peck?’ She repeatedly offered Peck a job in her museum as a guide and as an
exhibit himself, he being the last victim to be skinned by the monstrosity
back in the museum. Peck said the very idea gave him the willies, so it was
not just the statue by the entryway keeping him away from here.

‘Peck is . . . Peck, and all the rest are fine,’ Ambel replied, opening his
box.

Inside, two chainglass bottles nestled in kelp cotton. They contained rhombic
ruby crystals. Ambel handled the bottles with care as he took them out and
placed them on the table. Olian slid on a pair of surgical gloves, then a mask
and goggles, before pulling over a set of scales. Though a Polity citizen, she
had long been infected with the same virus as all Hoopers. Ambel leant back as
she tipped crystals into the scales and weighed them.

‘I make that about four hundred and seventy-three grams. The Spatterjay
measure is three hundred and twelve thanons, fifteen sear and twenty itch. Do
you agree?’

Ambel nodded—he had weighed the stuff himself about five times.

‘A profitable trip. Anyone get hurt?’

‘Not by the leeches.’ Ambel gestured with a thumb over his shoulder. ‘Boris
managed to cut off Crewman Sallow’s hand, but luckily it fell inside the giant
leech we were cutting open, and we were able to retrieve it. Sallow’s as good
as new now.’

‘So that’s three thousand one hundred and twenty New Skind, fifteen shligs and
twenty pennies.’ Olian nodded to one of the Golem, who departed. She sat back.
‘Our rate is five per cent, as always, but you can keep the money here on
account at three per cent interest, or we have some other interesting deals.’

Ambel started to fidget and scan around the room.

Olian continued, ‘You can buy share options in Artefact Trade Inc., or Island
Jewels have an interesting . . .’

Ambel completely lost interest and the rest of her speech became just a
background mutter to him. Once the Golem brought his money, Ambel thanked
Olian and made his escape. What need did he have of accounts and investments?
He would buy supplies, buy new rope and wood for repairs, maybe some Polity
toys. But very soon he would be back out on the open ocean, where the Skind in
your pocket meant less than the wind in your hair.

* * * *

Below a low bloom of pastel green cloud spreading across the emerald sky,
Windcheater the sail drifted on thermals high above the ferry. This was the
only powered vessel he allowed on the seas of Spatterjay. He had lifted the
design of the boat via his aug from historical records maintained in
cyberspace—liking it because it ran counter to all the Polity’s present
discrete technologies. It was in fact a Mississippi riverboat, though driven
by a fusion-powered electric motor with a guaranteed lifespan of two hundred
years. Windcheater liked to choose the technologies employed here, preferring
his world not to be absorbed into the homogeneous Polity.

Gazing down he noticed that some rhinoworms were following the ferry, no doubt
snapping up other creatures the big water wheels stunned in their leviathan
progress. He watched as one of his own kind in turn snapped up a rhinoworm and
flew off with the creature writhing in its jaws. He focused on the decks, but
the people there were unclear, so he routed visual reception through his aug
and in it magnified and cleaned up the image. The individual standing in the
bows, clad in a long black coat, had to be the reification. Windcheater
growled. No doubt Taylor Bloc had come to complain about interference in his
plans. The sail now lifted his head and peered towards the ferry’s
destination.

The Big Flint—a giant column of flint rearing a kilometre out of the sea—was
wreathed in scaffolding which supported platforms, stairways, the oblate forms
of easy-to-manufacture habitats, and communication arrays keeping the
inhabitants here in contact with the Polity’s AI networks. Hoopers and some
Polity citizens occupied those habitats, but his own kind kept to the
platforms and the flat top of the Flint. Windcheater had briefly tried out
enclosed residences for himself and his kind, but the resultant claustrophobia
for flying creatures accustomed to living in the open had been difficult to
overcome. At some point he intended to obtain Polity shimmer-shields because,
that phobia aside, he had never enjoyed some of the weather the planet threw
at the Big Flint.

‘I take it the Gurnard has arrived?’ he queried through his aug.

‘It’s in orbit, and Taylor Bloc’s cargo is being shuttled down to Mortuary
Island,’ Sniper, the de facto Warden, instantly replied.

Windcheater banked, feeling the warm air rushing over his wing surfaces, found
a thermal to take him higher.

‘What about the reifications?’

‘I’ve put out a call to those in the Dome. They’ll be shuttled to the island.

I’ll also lay on a special shuttle for those yet to tranship, to take them
direct. It’s about damned time. I’m getting an average of one complaint every
few minutes and the air is none too sweet up here.’

Windcheater growled agreement. He understood reifications trying to ascertain
why the nanochanger technology that could resurrect them had only worked on
Spatterjay. But their deification of Sable Keech into the ‘Arisen One’, and
their aim to journey to the Little Flint, where he had first employed his
changer, and there attempt their own resurrection, stank of religion. Keech
himself, before returning to the Polity and his beloved profession of hunting
down criminals, had warned Windcheater not to let something like that get
established here, as excising such was as difficult as getting rid of a
bait-worm infestation. However, reifications were very often wealthy, by dint
of having been around for a long time, and though Windcheater, Boss of
Spatterjay, did not want them on his world, he did rather like their money.

‘By the way,’ Sniper added, ‘are you also aware that a large number of those
reifs are not dead at all.’

‘You’re talking about the Batian mercenaries?’

‘Ah, so you are aware.’

‘Security for Lineworld Development’s investment in Bloc’s enterprise, and
probably what Lineworld will use to steal that enterprise from him. I don’t
know if Bloc is aware of them, nor do I care.’

‘Might get nasty,’ said Sniper with relish. ‘Many of the reifications are
Kladites—Bloc’s little army.’

‘It might.’ Windcheater gave an aerial shrug—that wasn’t his problem.

* * * *

Sniper did not want to be Warden, but such was his age and the sheer bulk of
his experience, it had been unavoidable. Having sacrificed his old drone body
to knock a Prador spaceship out of the sky before its owner used the vessel’s
weapons to fry a Convocation of Old Captains, he had uploaded to the other
Warden’s crystal and displaced that entity into storage. To relinquish control
back to the original Warden required his being loaded to some other form of
storage, and Sniper had thought about that long and hard. Over the last ten
years, various drone bodies had been offered to him by the sector AI, all of

which were better than his original in all but one respect: their armour and
weapons. The sector AI had obviously wanted a less troublesome Sniper: a
nicely castrated facsimile easier to control. But Sniper was a war drone,
first, foremost and always.

Obtaining the body he wanted took years, and used up a substantial portion of
his personal fortune. His search for a manufacturer capable of building to his
specifications was blocked by the sector AI at every turn. Then, when he did
find a manufacturer, on the fringe of the Polity, he discovered that the drone
body he sought came under Polity weapons proscription, and so could not be
transported by runcible or by any Polity vessel. But there were many free
traders working those fringes, and he used one of them instead. And now, at
last, his new body was here.

‘Looks like you’ll soon have your job back,’ the war drone informed the entity
crammed to one side of the space he occupied.

The original Warden muttered something foul. Its language had been
deteriorating lately, probably because of its close proximity to Sniper. The
war drone grinned inwardly, then directly picked up the feed from cameras
aimed at the spaceport on Coram, the moon of Spatterjay. His view was distant;
the port itself did not really come under Polity jurisdiction and so no
permanent cameras were established there. He magnified the image and tracked
back and forth across the crowded population of mostly privately owned ships.
These were of every imaginable design: utile ovoids, sharkish vessels,
multispherical—up to decasphere ships—a replica of an ancient passenger
aeroplane, deltawings, and even a replica of Nelson’s Victory. The grabship
from the Gurnard rested amid these like some blunt tail-less scorpion skulking
from the light, though what it now held in its claws gleamed. Impatient with
this view, Sniper sent out one of his drones.

‘Two, go take a look at my delivery for me, will you?’

The drone, a little cranky ever since occupying an enforcer shell on the
planet below during the same battle in which Sniper had brought down the
Prador ship, now resided in a body the shape of an iron turbot a metre long.
It had been sloping about the concourse waiting for Sniper’s attention to roam
elsewhere so it could go off and moonlight in one of the bars as a vending
tray.

‘Sure thing, Warden,’ it said without much enthusiasm.

Tracking it with pinhead
through a shimmer-shield
drive it should not have
lightly touched its mind

cameras in the concourse, Sniper watched it shoot out
port in the glass roof, briefly ignite a small fusion
possessed, then coast over to the spaceport. He then
and peered out through its eyes. Dropping down

through the diamond fibre rigging of the Victory, it then grav-planed a few
metres above the plascrete towards the grabship. Now Sniper could see the ship
had released its gleaming cargo, and that a big man in a big spacesuit was
driving a handler dray towards the precious load.

‘Is that you, Ron?’ Sniper sent, after probing for the suit’s com frequency.

‘It certainly is, Warden,’ replied the Old Captain.

‘I hadn’t expected to see you back here so soon.’

‘Nowhere is there anything like the sea-cane rum of home.’

Through the eyes of the turbot drone, Sniper watched while Captain Ron brought
the dray in close, picked up the framework containing the shining nautiloid
drone shell, then took it towards the cargo sheds on one side of the moon
base. Seeing where the man was heading, Sniper suddenly realized how he
himself could speed things up considerably.

‘Ron, don’t take the shell to the cargo sheds. There’s a clear area over to
the left of the base, as you face it. The drone just above you will lead you
there.’

Captain Ron looked up, nodded, then drove the handler after the drone as it
turned and slowly led the way to the area Sniper indicated. While this was
happening, Sniper began scanning through the systems he controlled. Yes, if he
wished, he could transmit himself directly into the drone shell with it
located anywhere up to a hundred thousand kilometres away, but there were
losses that last time, when he had transmitted himself up here to the
Warden—about two per cent he estimated. Bringing the shell in via the cargo
sheds would take time, as there was a lot of stuff going through there. But he
did not need to do either.

As many Polity citizens had discovered ten years ago, when the Prador ship had
revealed itself and begun its attack, this base was surrounded by powerful
armament. The particular weapon that interested Sniper was a projector for
electronic warfare, but not just the kind that knocked out systems with an EM
pulse. This projector also transmitted kill programs, viruses and worms, and
all the destructive cornucopia that had been evolving from the beginning of
the information age. He tracked the system, shutting off all the alarms and
disconnecting it from the rest of the weapons that could rise out of the
ground in a concerted response to a threat, then he activated it.

‘Well bugger me,’ said Ron.

Ahead of the Captain, precisely in the centre of the level area, the ground
erupted and out of it rose a column topped by the blockish structure of an
emitter array, enclosed in armour. It rose twenty metres into vacuum, then the
end split and opened like a tulip bud, to reveal the array itself. Sniper
began drawing in his awareness from the numerous systems he controlled. He
shut down the runcible, but it would not be off for long—only two people would
find themselves stepping out on the wrong world, and only a further two would
have their journey away from here delayed. The bandwidth, to the electronic
warfare weapon, was necessarily wide; wide enough to take semi-sentient killer
programs, and wide enough for Sniper. He probed ahead first to check the
receptivity of the drone shell, and the shell then activated dormant power
sources.

‘It might be an idea for you to just drop the shell there and move back, Ron.’

‘Yeah, it might at that.’

Sniper noticed how the Captain was peering at the signs of movement from the
nautiloid’s silver tentacles, and the occasional glimmer of lights from optic
ports in the head. The man lowered it in its framework, released it, then put
his handler dray hard in reverse.

Sniper was now ready, but one thing remained for him to do. He quickly found a
link that he, out of a sense of propriety, did not often use. Suddenly he was
gazing out across blue sea to an island where self-inflating habitats had been
landed, and where robots had built jetties and other structures. The eyes from
which he gazed he knew were turquoise, and set in the head of a floating iron
seahorse.

‘How goes it, Thirteen?’

‘Fair,’ replied this one of the old Warden’s subminds, SM13.

‘Perhaps you’ll soon think things better than fair. I’ve just transferred
funds to pay off the last of your indenture. You are now a free drone.’

‘Um,’ said the SM, ‘I really wanted to do that myself.’

‘Ah, but the old Warden will shortly be back in control, and he might be a bit
tetchy. Best it be done now.’

‘I see . . .Your shell arrived?’

‘Certainly did,’ Sniper replied, then cut the connection.

Nothing else remained now. It had been an interesting ten years acting as
Spatterjay’s Warden: watching Windcheater’s rise to power and the changes the
sail Boss wrought on the surface. But time and again he had wanted actually to
be there, and been hard pressed not to take over some of the various drones
scattered about the planet. Now he could get back into the game.

‘It’s all yours, Warden,’ he said, and began transmitting all that he was down
the optic and S-con linkages to the transmitters on the weapon. He grew less,
felt displacement and the division of self. As he went he could feel the
Warden coming out of storage and unfolding itself to reoccupy abandoned
spaces.

Hiatus.

Sniper expanded within the drone shell, checking out the systems at his
disposal as he shrugged himself into his new body. He began running
diagnostics, started the fusion reactor which until then had been in stasis.
He opened crystalline orange eyes, probed his surroundings with radar, a
laser-bounce spectrometer, many other instruments. Ultrasound, infrasound and
sonar would have to wait for a more suitable environment. He extruded his two
long spatulate tentacles and ran them through the stony dust before him, then
reached back and tore away protective wrapping and the encaging framework.
Engaging gravmotors, he shrugged away the last of his packaging.

‘A very fine swan,’ he stated, then turned on his fusion engines and hurtled
up over the moon base and round the moon itself. He checked his weapons
carousel, selected a low-yield missile, targeted a boulder on the moon’s
surface and spat down the black cylinder. The rock blew apart in a candent
explosion, hurling pieces of itself out into space. Sniper selected in turn a
laser, particle beam, then an APW, and converted each fragment in turn to
vapour.

‘Now we’re cooking!’

The blue and gold orb of Spatterjay rose above the rocky horizon. He adjusted
his course towards it, and accelerated.

* * * *

Coming out on deck with Bones trailing behind him, Aesop eyed the long pink
serpents thrashing in the sea, often lifting their rhinoceros heads out of the
waves with mouths crammed full of squirming leeches. He then turned his
attention to the beach, and saw that what he had at first taken to be flocks
of gulls were in fact clusters of off-white spiral shells. Frog whelks. It
seemed such an innocuous name for creatures that would happily chew down to
the bone anyone who set foot on the beach. Thankfully an enclosed walkway led
across that shore from the jetty the ferry was now coming alongside.

Aesop walked along the deck to where Taylor Bloc stood watching—bare of mask
and hood.

‘What do you think the response will be?’ Aesop asked.

Bloc paused before replying, probably wondering if he was prepared to permit
such familiarity from one of his slaves, then said, ‘Whatever it may be, we
will still get established on this world and the ship will be built.’

And how so very much did Taylor Bloc want that ship built. It had taken some
time in the early years for Aesop to figure the reif out, simply because there
was little facial expression to read. But now he was certain of what drove
Bloc. Few sentient reifs had any belief in the tenets of the Cult of Anubis
Arisen, as most of them became too old and experienced to be taken in by it
all, yet many of them remained the way they were out of long habit. Bloc did
believe in resurrection through the flesh, but his real aim in bringing
reified people here was for one purpose only—adulation—though as a corollary
he had become a leader of what some described as ‘the militant dead’. Bloc
also became very annoyed whenever he was thwarted, which was happening right
now. Certainly the relocation was a result of machinations by Lineworld
Developments, for the more cash it was necessary for the company to inject,
the greater would be their percentage of the eventual take, and cash injection
beyond a certain level meant they could also take control of the entire
project.

‘Of course, relocating the enterprise away from what passes as civilization
here, though initially costly, does provide other advantages,’ Bloc added.

Aesop knew what that meant. ‘But to both sides,’ he suggested.

‘I have one advantage of which Lineworld Developments could not conceive.’

Aesop made no reply to that. Despite all his years of experience Bloc had
still yet to learn that you could not coerce people into adulation, that it
was not something you gained through intimidation and murder. Aesop knew that,
for he had made a profession of such.

Crewmen, big heavy individuals with skin distinctively leech-scarred and
bluish, threw ropes to others of similar stripe down on the jetty. Aesop
watched with interest as the second group began hauling on the ropes. He had
heard about this sort of thing but thought the stories exaggerated. However,
as the ferry moved sideways up against the pearwood platform, he had to make
some rapid reassessments. Perhaps Bloc’s hiring of so many Hooper crewmen had
not been such a good idea.

As the three of them disembarked, Aesop noted that other ferry passengers were
keeping their distance. Bloc was beginning to reek, but no doubt wanted to get
this meeting out of the way before he again used his cleansing unit. Or
perhaps he was just getting careless. Aesop had noticed Bloc behaving rather
oddly lately—perhaps it was the pressure. As he stepped onto the jetty, he
turned and saw one of the Hoopers kick something squealing into the water. The
woman grinned at him.

‘Don’t worry,’ she said. ‘We only get one or two up on the jetty.’

Aesop made no response but to follow Bloc on into the enclosed walkway. There
he saw numerous stalked eyes, sticking up from the gathering of shells on the
beach, turning to track the progress of the passengers. He controlled himself
when a couple of those shells launched into the air and crashed against the
mesh before falling back down onto the beach again. A screech from a man
nearby told him that others had not been quite so prepared for this.

‘Have either of you had any odd messages from your internal diagnostics yet?’
Bloc asked.

‘I’ve yet to be bitten by a leech,’ Aesop replied.

Bones made no sound—his reply by other means.

‘Viral infection can be caused by other media,’ Bloc stated.

That required no response, so Aesop gave none.

It was the general opinion of those who had investigated the matter that
Keech’s success with the nanofactory changer had been due in part to his being
infected by the Spatterjay virus. There were other elements totake into
account though, like him being shot, his use of Intertox inhibitors, and the
delay before he got himself into a jury-rigged tank containing sterilized
seawater. It was all very risky, and not something Aesop would have
countenanced had he the choice. He kept himself well dosed with inhibitors to
prevent viral infection, and just hoped. Too little was known about the damned
virus. Bloc probably looked forward to his first ‘outside parameter function’
message from his internal hardware, which would tell him he was infected.

They mounted an enclosed stairway spiralling up the side of the Flint and
began to climb. Other passengers were soon wheezing after only a few nights.
Aesop, Bones and Bloc, clumping along behind the main crowd, did not wheeze,
of course, did not breathe at all.

At the first platform, most of the ferry passengers left the stairwell to
enter some kind of market. Aesop gazed out at the various stalls, many of them
stacked with souvenirs: reproduction thrall units, slave collars, figurines of
the Eight, variously sized models of the Skinner and other examples of the
planet’s weird life forms, whelk shells, heirodont mandibles or their bones
made into Hooper scrimshaw. Other stalls carried the usual cheaply produced
items found in markets all across the Polity: ceramal cutlery, chainglass
knives that would keep their edge for decades, image intensifiers, enviro
boots and suits, augs . . . The list just went on and on. A couple of stalls
carried terrariums and aquariums, and those who spent their money there would
afterwards require medical attention. Here, in this market, you could buy
everything from scratch-resistant sunglasses to the leech bite that would
impart immortality, even if that could be obtained for nothing anywhere else
on Spatterjay. Those tourists who bought it here showed their timidity or
stupidity.

By the time they had passed another two platforms, the three were alone on the
stair leading up. Eventually they stepped out on the top of the Big Flint
where Aesop studied his surroundings. Ten years ago Keech stood up here, but
things had certainly changed since then.

Some sails were huddled in a mass: large pinkish baggy bodies, long necks
hooking above them, terminating in crocodilian heads. Other sails were
scattered separately about on the top of the Flint or out on the bubble-metal
platform ringing it. Some operated cowled machines Aesop could not identify,
until stepping close to one with its weather shield open to find the sail
working, with its big spider hands, a touch console and screen inside.
Satellite dishes were positioned further out on the platform; cables snaked
across the stone. None of the sails paid the three much attention.

‘We are here to see Windcheater,’ Bloc announced.

Abruptly a number of heads swung towards them. Then the crowd of sails parted
and a larger, more aggressive-looking creature mooched over towards them. This
was definitely Windcheater—Aesop recognized him from the files he had been
instructed to study.

‘Yes,’ said the sail.

‘You’re Windcheater?’

The sail did not reply.

‘Are you Windcheater?’ Bloc tried again.

‘Evidently.’

Bloc said, ‘You’ve relocated us. We had an agreement.’

‘Yes.’

‘This is unacceptable. You can’t go back on your word.’

The sail arched its neck to bring its head down level with Bloc. ‘You paid me
so you could come here and build a ship to sail your pilgrims to the Little
Flint. The plans you submitted were for you to launch it from the Chel Island,
but I did not agree to them. I don’t want you people that close to me. Now
bugger off.’ The sail began to turn away.

‘What about the sails for our ship?’ Bloc quickly asked. ‘You agreed to that.
It’s part of your law that no ship can sail without at least one of your kind
aboard.’

‘You’ll get your sails,’ Windcheater told him.

‘There’s an economic reason for you moving us, isn’t there?’ Bloc suggested.

Aesop was impressed: Taylor Bloc was not normally so restrained.

Showing more interest than heretofore, the sail swung back. ‘For example?’

‘Because no more are being produced, there’s only a limited number of
reifications who can come here for either a cure or their physical destruction
by the virus, so eventually pilgrimages by those you find distasteful will
dwindle. So afterwards you’ll get yourself a piece of civilization established
on another island.’

‘Smart dead man,’ said the sail.

Aesop felt like laughing, but had lost that ability long ago. Nothing about
the additional costs and a probable takeover by Lineworld. Windcheater had
clearly been paid to relocate them. However, Bloc was only going through the
motions. He had obviously decided on his course now.

* * * *

The sail Huff had been informed by humans, AIs and Windcheater that he
remembered his name because he was brighter than the average sail, for a
certain horrible reason. When the Batian mercenary Shib had stapled Huff’s
neck to the mast of Captain Drum’s ship, the Ahab, and when Jay Hoop’s lunatic
wife Rebecca Frisk had subsequently cooked Huff’s skull with a laser, his
brain had then regrown without the usual hard wiring. Puff, it was supposed,
remembered her name for similar reasons, telling Huff she only vaguely
recollected the heirodont that had clamped its jaws on her skull when she had
peered over the edge of the Little Flint to see about snapping up one of the
hammer whelks nestling down there. Huff speculated that a similar happenstance
had resulted in Windcheater’s enhanced intelligence, perhaps when the planet
had been ruled by the Eight, who had taken as much pleasure in hunting
indigenes as those humans who escaped from the coring facility. Windcheater
was not telling. However, no such drastic damage had resulted in the cerebral
rewiring of the third sail, nor was likely to. Huff now eyed their companion.

Zephyr was as big as Windcheater, and no heirodont’s jaws carried the muscle
to crush his ceramal skull, and no one would be stapling him to a mast. His
tough carbon polymer skin was the hue of blued steel. His teeth were

chainglass and his bones were composite-reinforced bubble-metal. In his chest
he carried two state-of-the-art fusion reactors, which drove his carbon-fibre
muscles and powered his crystal brain and formidable sense array. His eyes
were gleaming emeralds. Zephyr had very little to fear, being a Golem sail.

Huff and Puff’s partnership had lasted for ten years, from when they
discovered much in common with each other and little with their fellows.
Zephyr, when he arrived here less than a year ago, had been much less coherent
than he was now. Windcheater had treated him with suspicion; the response of
other sails had been confusion. Huff and Puff, however, adopted him as an
outcast like themselves. They showed him their world, talked and flew with
him. In a short time they became fascinated by the Golem sail’s strange
combination of hard-headed wisdom and not quite sane pronouncements on life
and death. They argued and flew, learnt, and thus became even more distant
from their fellows. When he volunteered the three of them for a task other
sails wanted no part of, he became the leader and they the followers.

‘I think I see it now,’ said Huff.

‘You do,’ Zephyr replied. ‘And now we need to go faster.’ The Golem sail
accelerated.

Huff and Puff looked at each other questioningly, then grabbed air to catch up
with their companion.

‘What’s the hurry?’ Puff complained. ‘The money’s the same either way and
there’s no way they’ll be sailing without us.’

Zephyr glanced aside. ‘I will see the soulless sail.’

‘And . . . ?’ said Huff.

Zephyr’s voice changed to more normal tones, as if the Golem sail now assumed
a prosaic guise. ‘Beyond the reason that will soon become evident to you, we
have reason to get this part over with as quickly as possible.’ Zephyr held up
the harness he clasped in one claw. ‘We might not be within the Polity, but
this Warden will take a dim view of what we’re about if he catches us. From
what I’ve been told he doesn’t put much credence in the rules and regulations
supposedly governing his status.’

‘What might he do?’ Puff asked.

Huff had a damned good idea; he had been in the middle of the events that
resulted in the new Warden. He still remembered the taste of the human heads
he had bitten off just before the Ahab sank and the device inside it
detonated. And later he had been high in the sky watching when the war drone
Sniper, who was now the Warden, had come down like a hammer on that Prador
ship.

‘It is this way,’ said Zephyr. ‘The new Warden would try not to endanger any
innocent Polity citizen, but it might be possible to identify us by a chemical
analysis of the ash floating on the sea. I do not choose Death. I refuse it.’

‘But you are a Polity citizen,’ Huff pointed out.

Zephyr exposed his chainglass teeth so they glinted in the sunset light. ‘But
not innocent; and that I’m not an ignorant native makes me doubly culpable.’

‘No forgiveness then,’ asked Puff.

‘Outmoded concept of human law. We are all responsible for our actions.’
Zephyr pointed ahead with one long metallic talon. ‘Do you see now?’

Huff and Puff peered ahead.

‘Oh, one of them,’ said Huff.

* * * *

3

Putrephallus Weed:
phallic in shape and stinking like rotten corpses, this is not a plant
xenobotanists much enjoy studying. They grow from a large seed, throwing up in
only a few days a two-metre-tall green phallic stalk, and spreading catch
leaves low to the ground. The tips turn red as they ripen, attracting the lung
birds to eat them, gain some nutrition from the outer fruiting body, then

vomit up the inner pollen sack. This usually happens in another stand of the
same plants, perhaps caused by some kind of pheromonal trigger. The pollen
sacks splash on the ground, spraying liquid pollen over the catch leaves and
entering their central stigma. The seeds then developing are raised up in the
tips of yet more phallic growth, are eaten by the lung birds, then vomited up
at other locations. Lung birds, perhaps gratefully so, are also the main
pollinators of the sea lily -

His room already booked and hotel code key to hand, Bloc strode into the hotel
ignoring the dubious looks cast in his direction. His suitcase, walking on
four spidery legs, had to scuttle to keep up with him. Usually he used a hover
trunk to transport his belongings, but had purchased this semi-AI luggage
thinking Windcheater’s proscription covered all forms of anti-gravity. It
annoyed him to now discover the ruling applied only to privately owned
transportation for people and cargoes that could be moved by sailing ship but,
even then, reasonable requests might be granted. Windcheater simply did not
want the skies crowded with AG scooters and cars, and did not want the sail
and Hooper monopoly of sea transportation undermined.

Taylor Bloc entered the elevator, a couple stepping in behind him, then
quickly stepping out again while staring at him accusingly. It was long past
time for Bloc to use his cleansing unit and related equipment. He stepped out
on the relevant floor, moved quickly to his room, and there ordered his
suitcase up on the bed and open, while he shed his coat and envirosuit,
followed by an underlying noxmol suit. This particular garment consisted of a
porous inner layer, a layer of activated carbon wool through which air was
cycled, finally exiting through micron filters at his shoulders, and an outer,
impenetrable layer of monofabric. Shedding that he then inspected his
absorbent under suit, which was stained and stinking. He stripped it off,
balled it, and threw it into the disposal unit. Then walked over to the
wardrobe mirror to give himself a visual inspection.

He was a corpse, grey and wrinkled. His death had been hard, and though they
had done their best to put him back together during the reification process,
their work had been, so to speak, cut out for them. His genitals were gone.
They had never been able to find them, though he had later learnt, to his
disgust, what had happened to them, and consequently something of one of his
killer’s appetites. His broken or severed bones, the reifiers bone-welded and
clamped, while installing the joint motors. His organs and muscles had been
meticulously returned and connected up with balm pipes. Cell welding,
carbon-fibre mesh, collagen foam and even stitching had all been used. Much of
his seared skin had been useless, hence his appearance now: muscles visible in
their wash of dirty blue balm under translucent syntheskin.

Bloc inspected his front, noting the growth of some sort of mould at the join
between synthetic and real skin at his waist. He took a hand mirror out of his
suitcase, then turned slowly, observing himself in the now doubled reflection
from the wardrobe mirror. Ah, there was the main reason for the multitude of
error messages flashing up in his visual cortex: underneath syntheskin
covering his lower back, a wriggling colony of small green maggots. They had

to be some tough alien strain, since the insecticides in the balm washing
round inside him was proof against all Terran infestations. But he had dealt
with such problems before and knew the routine. First, though, his exterior.

From his case Bloc removed a flat square bottle of a green jelly and a
long-handled soft brush, and took them with him to the bathroom. Here he
found, as requested, the shower had the facility to mix additives. He uncapped
the bottle, pressed it into the receiver, and turned on the shower. The water
turned green with the addition of a powerful concentrate of antivirabact and
insecticides. The water that ran down the drain was not such a pleasant
colour, though. Now using the brush he worked over his entire body, cleaned
away the mould and eyed some of the green maggots wriggling down the waste.
After his shower he used the air dryer, as employing a towel might have rubbed
away more than just moisture.

Returning to his bedroom, Bloc took a handful of elasticizer cream from a tub
in his case, and rubbed it into all his grey skin. Sitting on a towel on the
bed, he then took out his cleansing unit. This device was encased in brushed
aluminium, circular, twenty centimetres across and ten deep. It was a more
modern version of the device Sable Keech had once used in this very hotel, but
then Keech’s reification did predate his own by about five hundred years. The
two tubes he uncoiled from a hatch in the side, he plugged straight into
sockets below his armpit. The device started cycling immediately, pumping out
filthy grey-blue balm, filtering it and adjusting its chemical composition
back to optimum and pumping it back in like liquid sapphire. He would empty
the device’s sump sometime later. Now for the maggots.

Bloc pulled out a flat square box of the same brushed aluminium as his
cleanser, opened it, and scooped out a handful of small silvery objects. To
the naked eye they looked nothing much, but magnification revealed them as
small metal beetles, scarabs, with their legs folded close. He placed them
against his skin below the maggot infestation, waited a moment, then took his
hand away. They were all gone; burrowing through the joint to hunt down their
prey.

While he waited for the various processes to complete, Bloc pulled his noxmol
suit closer with his foot, stooped and picked it up. He opened the top pocket
and removed from it a lozenge of golden metal with attached neck chain. This
was what it was all about.

The nanofactory changer was the creation of a brilliant scientist, resulting
from her research into an alien technology that had caused some problems for
the Polity a few centuries back. It was packed with Von Neumann nano- and
micromachines, and as such was capable of reproducing itself. All that was
needed was another case built to specifications stored in its memory—a case
packed with the base elements required to build its complex guts. The two
cases were then connected, submerged in a zero-G tank of water containing
metal salts, nanoscopic gold particles and free droplets of liquid mercury,
which then had a huge electric charge put across it. Bloc had seen this done.
When the process completed, the two now identical nanofactories rested in a

Gordian tangle of strange nanocircuitry which rapidly began to fall apart. The
whole process defied analysis even by AI, for, following twisted Heisenbergian
principles, it broke down if any kind of scan was used to study it. The
nanofactories themselves were the same: a scan of the case resulted in
processes activating inside it, which in turn resulted in the case ending up
full of either metallic sludge or dangerous nanomachines that not even the
dead would want in their bodies.

The first nanofactory changer had been given to the Cult of Anubis
Arisen—their shot at resurrection. It had never worked: of the first three
reifs to use it, two had come close to life before collapsing to sludge, and
the third was now an exhibit in a museum on Klader. He was subsequently named
the bone man. Over the years many others had taken the chance, and none had
succeeded. The tales of what had happened to them were all grotesque: there
was the reif who nearly made it, but as his blood began to circulate he
sprouted hands all over his body before falling into a pile of those members;
there was the one whose head turned into a single glistening eye; and another
in whom the process generated so much heat that he simply exploded. Sable
Keech, during his relentless pursuit of the Eight, had never learnt of this
history. But then he had never been a member of the Cult, which was something
Cult members had never publicized. Bloc only learnt the truth when he bought
out what remained of the Cult, and transformed it to his own purposes. Where
Keech had obtained his changer, no one knew. His use of it, even in extremity,
obtained from his ignorance of what it might do to him. Yet he had succeeded:
it had resurrected him. He was the Arisen One. It somewhat annoyed Bloc that,
having returned to life, Keech had then returned to his old existence as a
policeman—such a prosaic denouement.

Bloc
then
neat
They

replaced the device in his suit’s pocket, unplugged his cleansing unit,
looked down at the towel behind him. The beetles were marching out in a
line, stacking dead maggots before returning to the hole in his back.
were not finished yet. He would wait with the patience of a corpse.

* * * *

Sitting alfresco at the Baitman, sipping a tin mug of rum, Janer wondered if
it was true they made the stuff by straining rocket fuel through a bag of
sea-cane. It certainly seemed that those Hoopers who smoked were wary of
lighting their pipes or cigars in the proximity of their drinks. He scanned
around. These outside tables—a new addition since he was last here—were mostly
occupied, as from them it was easy to see the raised platform nearby over the
heads of the growing crowd. Evening was now closing in and electric
streetlights—another addition—were coming on and igniting all with lurid
greenish light. Forlam, sitting in one of the three seats around the table,
had not taken his avid gaze away from that platform since they arrived. The
other seat was empty, but the large tin mug before it engraved with the word
‘Ron’ was enough to deter any of the surrounding Hoopers from sitting there.
Janer remembered a conversation with Keech in this very street. ‘He, I would
guess, is an Old Captain, and has authority by dint of the simple fact that he
can tear your arms off.’ Janer had just met Captain Ron for the first time.

‘I didn’t know you did this sort of thing here,’ Janer said conversationally.

It was the hive mind that responded: ‘It was going to happen to Captain
Ambel.’

Forlam said nothing, just kept on staring.

Janer nodded. Of course, had the Convocation of Old Captains found Ambel
guilty, the sentence would have been death, though the method different. He
looked up as the crowd parted and Ron came through to reclaim his seat.

‘What’s happening?’ Forlam asked, licking his lips.

Ron eyed him. ‘Two lads off the Vignette, they slipped some sprine into a
fellow crewman’s tea after a fight over money. Can’t say I’m surprised.
Convocation sentenced ‘em to the same end.’

‘Convocation?’ Janer peered around. ‘Where are the rest of the Old Captains?’

Ron glanced at him. ‘Seems we’ve entered our technological age. Not sure I
like that.’

The hive mind chipped in with, ‘All the Captains now use holographic
conferencing links for Convocation. They now only meet physically if the
matter is really serious.’

How serious was ‘really serious’, Janer wondered.

‘Why aren’t you surprised?’ he asked.

‘The Vignette, bad ship, and Captain Orbus . . .’ Ron trailed off into an
embarrassed silence.

The three returned their attention to the platform as the first of the Hooper
crewmen was dragged up onto it, fighting all the way despite the ceramal band

around his body to which his wrist manacles were secured, and the manacles
around his ankles. The man was naked, and by the look of him Janer reckoned
him to be a Hooper of about a hundred and fifty years. Those wrestling with
him attached a chain from the band to one of the two heavy iron posts
protruding from the platform.

‘Fucking bastards!’ the man yelled. ‘He was squeaky weed-head slobber-arse!’
Released, he yanked at his chain, glared around.

The second man walked calmly onto the platform. His expression contained some
of the craziness Janer had seen only recently in Forlam’s expression. He stood
meekly as they attached him to his post. When the platform was clear but for
these two, an Old Captain stepped up and stood with his back to the abusive
Hooper.

‘Orbus,’ Ron muttered. ‘There won’t be any fancy speeches.’

‘Well, you know the decision,’ the Captain said, ‘and it’s my job to deal with
my crewmen.’

He pulled on a set of gauntlets, drew a dagger from the sheath at his wide
belt, and inspected the blade. Before the Hooper behind him could react he
turned fast and drove the dagger into the man’s guts, withdrew it, then
stepped away from him. The man grimaced, did not bleed.

‘Sprine on the blade,’ Forlam informed Janer irrelevantly. Janer realized it
had to be that. Stabbing a Hooper with a clean blade would not kill him, only
irritate him.

Orbus returned the dagger to its sheath, rattled it up and down for a moment
then took it out for his inspection again. The second Hooper was watching his
companion when the dagger, more sprine on it from the sheath, went into him.
He oomphed, turned to Orbus with an expression of hurt accusation.

‘You could have let me watch,’ he complained.

‘Now,’ Forlam whispered.

The skin around the first Hooper’s stab wound turned yellow, that stain
spreading. He started to shake, froth bubbling from his mouth. The crack of

one of the manacles snapping was audible from where Janer sat, but the man
only raised his free hand to wipe his lips. The second man was going the same
way. Now the first one’s eyes rolled up into his head and he issued a
long-drawn-out groan. A split appeared in his torso and black liquid began to
run out. Other body splits appeared; more liquid poured onto the platform.
Then he really began to come apart. One of his biceps departed his arm bone.
His guts began to bubble out of the first split. The victim started to sink
down, still coming apart. What remained was a steaming pile of separated bone,
flesh and organs, as if the man had been slow pressure-cooked for a day. The
second man reached similar pilehood shortly after him. Janer gulped some rum.
‘I nearly gave you the power to do that,’ he said, peering down at the encased
hornets on his shoulder.

Ron and Forlam glanced at him, saw who he was addressing, then returned their
attention to the platform, where a group of Hoopers had climbed up with
shovels, buckets and mops.

‘If you recollect, you did give it to me, but then Captain Ambel took it away
again. But be assured, in my possession such power would have been rarely
used. What one of the older minds might do with it, even I am loath to
speculate.’

‘What are they like then, these older minds?’

‘Unfathomable,’ was all the reply the hive mind offered.

Janer returned to easy conversation with his two human companions, as the rum
began to work its familiar magic on him. At one point he commented, ‘They
showed little fear.’

‘Hoopers don’t fear a quick death,’ Ron replied.

‘Do they fear anything?’

‘Oh yes, young Hoopers fear falling into the sea and not dying.’

‘Old Captains?’

‘What young Hoopers fear, plus the fate they avoided when Jay Hoop was in
control here: they fear and hate the prospect of coring or having a thrall

implanted,’ Ron explained.

‘Still... it was all such a long time ago.’

‘Never underestimate how Old Captains feel about that,’ Ron warned.

Seemingly without transition thereafter, they were sitting in twilight
reliving old battles. Janer asked Ron if he knew what Keech was now doing.

‘Last I heard, he’s back on Klader working for the Polity monitor force,’ the
Captain replied.

‘Still a policeman?’ Janer asked incredulously.

Ron eyed him. ‘Seven hundred years being dead didn’t put him off, so what do
you think?’

Thereafter Janer and Ron became intent on extracting from Forlam the truth
about what he had done with a certain female Batian mercenary. The other
tables were empty now and no one objected when someone brought a chair to
their table and joined them. Janer studied the dark-browed Hooper, trying to
figure what it was about him—something out of kilter.

‘I want to join your crew,’ said the man to Ron.

‘And you are?’

‘Isis Wade.’

‘What experience do you have, Wade?’ Ron asked genially. Janer had lost count
of the refills now.

‘As much experience as I want or need,’ Wade replied.

Ah, that’s it, Janer thought. The man was dark, his skin was patterned with
leech scars, and he moved with that Hooper rolling gait. But Janer could see
the difference. It was in the minutiae: mannerisms, exactitude of speech, how
precisely soiled was his clothing, how his breathing was not quite in synch
with his speech and movement—and probably also in things below conscious
perception, like pheromones. Now why would a Golem android want to join Ron’s
crew, and, for that matter, the Captain’s crew on what vessel? Ron was not
returning to the Gurnard, and his own sailing ship had ended up at the bottom
of the sea ten years ago.

Janer lost track of their conversation for a while, then came back to hear Ron
saying, ‘Okay, you’re on. One like you might be useful.’

‘When does she sail?’Wade asked.

Ron replied, ‘They’ve got some of your kind working day and night on her, so
not long. I’m getting some others together, but most are already on contract.’

‘What are you talking about?’ Janer asked.

Ron eyed him. ‘Why, we’re talking about the Sable Keech. What else?’

* * * *

A skirt of warty flesh, hard as stone, oozed up the beach, and a long tentacle
uncoiled from it. Erlin glanced back at the dismembered whelk on her surgical
table and guessed the monstrous mollusc rising out of the sea was not looking
for explanations. Its shell, encrusted with flatweed and alive with small
prill, was the size of a large house. It rose up on a mound of flesh and in
that mound two eyes blinked open, then everted from the main body on stalks
thick as her leg. More tentacles unrolled up the beach, then a longer one with
a wide flat end snapped back behind the rising shell then slammed forward and
down exploding a shrapnel of stones in every direction. The tentacle tip
rested momentarily a few metres from her door before the creature drew it back
again. It was coming on rapidly, having now risen over the underwater ledge.
Erlin dived aside as the pillar of stony flesh slammed down where she had just
been standing. Rolling to her feet, she saw the tentacle slide quickly inside
her house. There it paused, and a deep bass groaning issued from the monster.
As the tentacle withdrew, a second one of the same type hammered down, and
Erlin stared aghast at her home of a year. She had hoped to dive back inside,
retrieve some weapon, but the dwelling now looked like a simnel cake that
someone had smacked squarely with a lead bar. She glanced back towards the
sea, and the two eyes pivoted towards her. She ran inland.

Stupid stupid stupid. What catastrophe had denuded this island of large
animals? What had smashed peartrunk trees and driven a lane through the
island’s central jungle? Well, her answer was coming after her now, by the
tonne.

As she neared the island’s centre she looked back to see the monster revealed
in all its glory, ploughing up the lane it had made before her arrival here.
Sunset light glinted on a shell similar to that of its young, just rougher,
older, and a lot lot bigger. Its visible body, stretching out below that
shell, resembled that of an octopus, though the eyes extruded on stalks, the
tentacles were without suckers, and the skirt between them extended further
from the body itself than it did on the Terran cephalopod. Its upper surfaces
were warty and a greyish purple, whilst its under surfaces were almost white—a
pastel lavender shade. Had she not been running for her life, Erlin would have
been fascinated.

She turned abruptly to her right and entered the dingle. A few hundred metres
inwards, the island rose to a rocky peak which the monster might not be able
to reach. Immediately, as she ran into the gloom, a leech the size of her arm
dropped on her head and attempted to slide down round her neck like a feather
boa. She grabbed it and flung it aside as its bubbling and churning tube mouth
groped for her cheek. Other leeches fell around her in an awful fleshy rain,
but she was moving too fast now to allow any of them an opportunity to feed.
She crashed into a stand of putrephallus, held her breath going through it,
and for as long as she could after departing the other side. Even so, when she
did take a breath, she nearly vomited at the stench.

Now a slope lay before her, thick with bubbleweed. She skirted this, knowing
that running up a slope this covered was almost impossible, as the weed
bursting underfoot would turn the surface almost frictionless. She mounted a
stone ridge snaking down the slope, and ran up that, slipping once and banging
her knee, then again as she departed it at the top. From down below she heard
the creature’s crashing commotion as it entered the dingle. Glancing back she
saw it wrench from the ground the peartrunk tree from which the leeches had
been falling, lift it ten metres into the air, then hurl it. The tree crashed
into the slope below her. Leeches, pieces of wood and sods of bubbleweed
rained past her. She fell flat to avoid a flying branch, rose again to see the
monster now reach the putrephallus stand. It hesitated there, drew back and
began to skirt it, but still it came on.

Erlin laboured up the slope to the highest point on the island. Many times she
had come to this rocky prominence to survey the surrounding gleam of
green-blue balmy seas. Even as she reached this height she realized there
would be no safety here. A tentacle slammed down only metres below her—the
creature, now past the putrephallus, had slowed not at all. Her only option
was to just keep on running round and round the island. Even if she managed to
stay ahead of the monster during the approaching night, and not make just one
fatal error, her tough Hooper body would eventually give out. For the giant
whelk only needed to be relentless. Erlin felt sure she was going to die, and
all her thoughts on the matter of her death—the malaise that had first brought
her here to this planet to find Ambel, and here to this island to
‘think’—seemed so inconsequential in that moment. She had never felt so alive.

‘Fuck you!’ she shouted at the monster.

‘Face Death, and know it as the enemy,’ spoke a voice, as wings boomed above
her and shadows occluded the darkening sky. Then long-fingered claws gripped
her shoulders and hauled her up into the firmament.

* * * *

The juvenile glister, being small and necessarily opportunist, had been
waiting in the depths for just such a moment, its antennae up as it
ascertained that the giant whelk had definitely gone ashore. It rose up onto
its multitude of legs, flicked its tail, and just gently touching the bottom
with its sharp feet, bounced along towards the brood of young whelks. It came
from down-current, and its camouflaged carapace gave it added advantage. Every
time a stalked eye swung towards it, it changed its buoyancy, dropped to the
bottom and froze. When it was close enough it gave a powerful flick of its
flat tail and came down on the nearest whelk. The glister closed its claws in
the flesh directly below the whelk’s shell before the creature had time to
draw in its tentacles and the main mass of its body. The rest of the whelks
immediately withdrew into their shells, but the glister had enough here—it was
not greedy. It dragged its prey clear of the others, and with one claw
remaining clamped into its flesh so the creature still could not escape, began
tearing away lumps of it and feeding. The whelk thrashed at the glister with
its tentacles, but those tentacles had not yet gained the concrete consistency
of its parent’s. Its eye-stalks slapped from side to side until the glister
snipped them off with its free claw and fed them into its mandibles. Soon it
was into the guts of the thing, discarding the long serrated beak, sucking in
loops of intestine. Then abruptly its antennae flicked upright as it detected
something else in the water. It dropped the shell, despite it still containing
plenty of flesh, pushed itself off from the bottom and swam away just as fast
as it could. The problem it had always found, with dining on the sea bottom,
was the uninvited guests.

The turbul shoal, forever patrolling the depths—feeding and being fed
upon—their outer flesh constantly needing to be replaced, were always hungry.
The scent of ichor in the water drove them to a frenzy with half-remembered
feasting on the contents of easily broken shells. However, the still-present
other scent from the giant whelk itself reminded them of near escapes, the
loss of outer flesh and sudden reductions in their number.

The first turbul nosed cautiously up out of the depths—a long
five-hundred-kilogram creature with caiman jaws and bright blue fins grown
seemingly at random from its cylindrical dark green body. It sucked the water
in through its nostrils, blowing it out through the gill holes down its
length, flicked its whip tail, the hatchet fin on the end of that dislodging
rocks down the slope behind it, and came on. Ahead of it the infant whelks
again extruded eye-stalks and tentacles to test the water, immediately became

agitated and drew closer together. The turbul circled, joined by others of its
shoal. Then it shot in.

The whelks immediately retracted excrescences they had been cautiously easing
out again, and sucked down hard on the bottom. The turbul clamped its jaws
closed on the shell of one near the brood’s edge, wriggled its long heavy body
and tugged the creature from the bottom. A few metres up it released the
creature, arched its body, and slammed its tail fin into shell. The blow
nearly cut the whelk in half and the turbul began champing down its tender
flesh, the water growing cloudy about it.

The others began to attack now, then the whole shoal hit. It was as if someone
had detonated an underwater mine. Silt and ichor exploded in every direction;
iridescent shell drifted down through the water. Long heavy bodies rolled and
thrashed. Whelks were jerked through all this, shattered and torn apart. Half
an hour later the shoal began to lose interest and drift away, but now prill
and leeches swarmed in to snap up what remained. In another half-hour they
were gone. All that remained was a mess of glittering shell, and even that
gleam disappeared as the silt settled down to shroud it.

* * * *

Hovering on AG, Sniper watched the Island of Chel being slowly revealed by the
morning sun. Below him geodesic domes nestling in the spreading sprawl of the
Hooper town were licked by the yellow-green glare. The dingle surrounding this
settlement was cut through by numerous paths, shadowy now, and many wide
plascrete roads had been built. One extended from the greatly enlarged docks
to branch into the town, another stretched in from the floating shuttle
platforms. There were vehicles down there: wheeled cars and transports.
Windcheater’s rules concerning antigravity transport now prevented the use of
AG taxis between the platforms and domes and anywhere else on the island and,
for that matter, on the planet. The rules did not apply to him or the other
drones, however. Windcheater liked them—did not mind them up in his air.

A shuttle rose from the platforms, not a flying wing but a long flattened
cylinder with thruster nacelles to the rear. It rotated in mid-air, aiming for
the horizon, and then its motors ignited, their glare matching the rising sun.
Watching it go, the old war drone keyed into the Warden’s com frequencies,
glad to see that the AI had not yet found the covert programs he had left in
place. Sniper could now listen in to secret communications, but for how long
that would last he did not know. It would end as soon as the AI changed its
frequency codings.

As he had guessed, the shuttle was a planetary one that Windcheater allowed to
transport reifications to Mortuary Island. He was just about to shut off the
link when he picked up some unusual traffic between the Warden and numerous
sources below. One particular exchange riveted his attention.

‘He came through while you weren’t yet back in charge here,’ said a voice from
the main dome. ‘We were tracking him aboard some private ship concerns and
expected him to join the Gurnard, where our agents could have apprehended him.
Turns out that lead was a dead end. He in fact used the runcible network long
before. We since traced his journey through five jumps from Earth.’

‘Don’t you think you should have informed Sniper?’ the Warden asked.

‘My instructions were to keep this from him. It’s a touchy situation and
apparently Sniper is not that good at being diplomatic.’

‘Agreed, but perhaps diplomacy is not what’s required here.’

‘I’m just following orders.’

‘So you’ve lost this individual now?’

‘Seems that way. He walked out of the Metrotel leaving his luggage behind him
and just never came back. My agents are scouring the island but there seems no
sign of him.’

‘Yes, I’m receiving their reports now.’

‘He could have gone into the sea. That’d be no problem for one like him.’

The Warden replied, ‘I think you overestimate Polity technology and
underestimate the dangers of the deeps.’

Sniper spun, in his frustration, like a silver coin. Who or what were they
talking about? The answer was provided by yet another communication between
one of those agents and the Warden.

‘We’ve scanned the Trancept Arcade. No sign of that signal and no one has
eyeballed the Golem. Chelar released a cloud of micro-eyes in there, so if he
puts in an appearance we’ll be on him in a second.’

Submind Seven, not so ebullient now his master was back in control, replied,
‘Check the concourse now. You got nothing on secondary emitters?’

‘No—there must be hundreds of them all over the planet, smuggled in over the
last few years. The primary U-space transmitter could be anywhere in the
vicinity of the planet—supposing there’s only one of them—or it might be
encoded through the runcible itself.’

‘Bastard to track that down, man. About a hundred thousand constant aug links,
and thousands more private messages.’

‘You’re telling me?’

‘Yeah, I am. Keep searching.’

The communication cut off.

Golem? It had to be a renegade—they were not unheard of. But what was it doing
here and, most importantly, would any explosions be involved? Sniper slowed
his rotation as a com channel opened to him.

‘Did you get all that, Sniper?’ the Warden asked.

‘Sneaky fucker,’ the old drone replied.

‘I’m sneaky?’

The Warden changed codes and the secret com channels abruptly disappeared.
Sniper swore and wished he had left more hidden programs but, not expecting
anything to start happening here so soon, he had not considered any of those
channels very important.

‘Do you need any help?’ he wheedled.

‘I don’t know,’ said the Warden. ‘I like my drones to follow orders and I’m
not sure I have use for one carrying enough armament to cripple a destroyer.’

‘I promise not to blow up anything,’ Sniper replied.

‘You and I know that, should circumstances permit, you won’t keep to that
promise. However, I need someone to search the sea surrounding Chel, and to
check all sailing ships that departed from there over the last two weeks.’ The
Warden spat down a list and the probable destinations of those ships. ‘I’ve
dropped SMs Six to Ten in geosurvey shells and am moving Eleven and Twelve
into the area. You can coordinate with them.’

Sniper let out a long whoop as he arced out of the sky to hit the sea with a
huge splash. As he sank he turned on his sonar and all his other useful
detectors. A glister immediately scuttled out from a mass of floating
sargassum to investigate the disturbance, took one look at the great shining
drone, then scuttled back. Sniper tracked it with a launch tube, and loaded a
mini-torpedo with a phosphorus warhead. Immediately a U-space link opened to
him.

‘And Sniper, show a little restraint with the local fauna. I don’t want an
ecological disaster,’ the Warden added.

Sniper harrumphed, withdrew the tube, and began searching.

* * * *

4

Sail:
with the necessity for three males to fertilize one female egg, and that egg
then encysted and stuck, in its cocoon, on the side of just one location—the
Big Flint—it is no surprise that the sail population remains small. The sail,
however, being the largest flying creature on the planet, is not prone to
predation, also is intelligent and benefits from viral immortality. It has
been proven to the satisfaction of forensic AIs that there are even sails over
a thousand years old, some of them remembering the first arrival of humans on
Spatterjay. Those same AIs are more cautious about the veracity of claims made
by some sails of having witnessed volcanic eruptions known to have taken place
ten thousand years ago.

It is perhaps a sign of the sail’s innate intelligence that it never fed on
humans (the stories of people disappearing near the Big Flint are apocryphal.
. . probably). It is a creature that feeds on the wing, and any native
Spatterjay life form is a viable food resource, except leeches, which
apparently give them violent flatulence, and those larger deep oceanic
creatures which are just too inaccessible or too large. Sails dominate the
skies, since there is only one other flying creature known on Spatterjay, and
that is rather insignificant: the lung-bird -

Without any transition at all, Vrell was awake and alert. This made no sense
to him because anoxia led to gradual physical shutdown, then death. He
unfolded his legs and pushed himself up from the floor. Silt spilled from his
carapace, but it was the only cloudiness in water which just a seeming moment
ago had been murky. Now it was utterly clear and still. He must have been
unconscious for longer than he had thought. With his one hand he plucked the
mission timer from his weapons harness and studied it.

Impossible.

Vrell discarded the device, sure it must be damaged. Prador could hibernate
for long periods, but hardly that long. Anyway, his kind could not hibernate
at all unless in an oxygenating atmosphere—to do so underwater would lead to
one never waking up. This was madness, surely. Vrell shook himself, spilling
more silt from his carapace. He felt a huge pressure inside him, and a tension
as if something internal was twisted out of position. He shook himself again,
and felt something begin to shift inside his carapace. There abruptly came a
crackling noise, jets of ichor squirting from under the claw patch, and a
relief of internal pressure. Vrell stared in amazement at the translucent
embryonic claw protruding from the now broken patch. Then, underneath him,
followed one cracking sound after another. To check, he folded his eye-palp
down in time to see pieces of medical porcelain sinking to the bottom. But to
look was not even necessary as the incredible sensitivity of his new
manipulatory hands told him all he needed to know. He was an adult; this was
impossible. Yet another patch broke and a leg folded into view and, while he
was studying this with his palp eye, the Prador realized he was now seeing a
hazy image through turret eyes that should never have recovered sight after
being burnt in an APW blast. Adolescent Prador regrew their limbs, but no
Prador ever regrew its secondary eyes. Something quite odd and quite wonderful
was happening to his body. But he was still trapped here.

Vrell turned towards the door; he required some new miracle to get him through
that. Deciding to try something more prosaic, he drew his rail-gun from his
harness, aimed at the door’s edge, and fired. A stream of missiles slammed
through the water, leaving white lines, and smashed into the side of the door,
then zinged away. Some of the ricochets chipped Vrell’s carapace, but he
continued firing until the magazine was empty. He then took his plasma torch
to the weakened metal, but only managed to cut a small hole before the torch
gave out. Vrell could just about poke his claw through it, but it was still a

victory, because now air was bubbling in and the water draining out. He
definitely would not suffocate—just starve.

His new limbs were now growing at phenomenal speed, their growth spurt sucking
Vrell’s insides empty. His hunger became savage and he scoured his prison for
something to eat. There was nothing evident, no living leeches, and no remains
of those he had broiled with his water gun. There should have been some in
here. It seemed, therefore, that the mission timer had been correct. He knew
that leeches could go somnolent for long periods and that it took years for
them to die of starvation. He picked the timer back up, studied it for a long
moment, then returned it to his harness. What now? What should he do now?

Vrell did have a few options left to try. He detached the rail-gun from its
magazine suspended on his harness, then also detached the welding unit. Both
of these implements contained laminar batteries—the plasma torch having ceased
to function only because he had depleted its gas supply. He disassembled these
two devices, removed their batteries, and jammed them into the hole he had
made, then scuttled back towards the other blast door. The water level had
sunk to the bottom of the hole now. Vrell submerged and pointed his water gun
towards the two batteries. Laminar batteries did not respond well to excessive
heating. Lowering his eye-palps, Vrell fired.

It took just a minute, in which the air space above him filled with clouds of
steam. As the two batteries detonated, the shock wave slammed through the
Prador with such force that he reflexively adopted a defensive pose: folding
up all his limbs and sinking. When he finally unfolded, the water was hot and
acidic, and the air above it unbreathable. Vrell scrambled over to the door to
see what damage he had done. The door itself seemed to have shifted back a
little way, and after a moment Vrell detected a current—the rest of the water
was draining away. He jammed his claw into the buckled corner and, with his
feet scrabbling at the floor, shoved as hard as he could. Was he imagining
that the door flexed? That was possible, since the door, though armoured, had
been constructed in layers of composite, insulation and foamed porcelain so as
to absorb rather than deflect shock. Then Vrell remembered the dent he had
earlier put in the wall. That too was armoured.

Vrell moved back and watched carefully. The water would constrict his
movements, so he must wait. Also, his new limbs had by now attained full
growth and were beginning to darken as they hardened. He would need them.

Hours passed as the water level kept on dropping. When it had sunk below his
now shrunken and concave belly plates, Vrell once again approached the door.
He struck it hard with his old claw, eyed the dent made, hit it testingly with
his new claw to find out if that one was strong enough. Seeing it was, he then
began to rain blow after blow on the door edge, denting the metal back into
the underlayer of foamed porcelain. A gap grew at the edge, wider and wider.
All the water rushed out.

You won’t stop me, Father.

Vrell thought of how he had been used, and how he would have been dispensed
with. He knew that with the extent of his development he had been close to
being considered a dangerous competing adult by his father, and consequently
having his limbs stripped off and his shell broken. In presentient times,
young Prador, enslaved by their father’s pheromones, would bring food to him.
But once one of those youngsters reached adulthood, it would shake off that
binding control and kill its father, who by then would be weak and lacking in
limbs. Prador technology had changed all that. Fathers stayed strong, enhanced
their pheromones, and used thrall technology to enslave other life forms. They
killed their young before they reached adulthood, or else sometimes neutered
them to keep them loyal, also surgically altered them and linked them into war
machines. Meanwhile the fathers just kept on living. Though this was just the
Prador way, Vrell was still angry, but he was deliberate in his anger, and it
gave him strength.

The door retreated gradually under his blows, the lower corner coming up out
of its channel in the floor, and the edge tearing out of the wall. Every time
his energy flagged, he thought again about what his father would have done to
him, and his strength returned. In his feverish activity, he noticed only
subliminally how his shell was much darker now, almost obsidian black. After a
wide gap was opened down the side of the door, he flipped sideways and pushed
himself into it, to try to lever it open further, and was surprised how far he
got before he became jammed. His whole body was now attenuated: the curve of
his belly plates replicating the curve of his upper shell with not much bulk
between. He levered himself back and forth, getting further through each time.
Then something gave, either the door or his shell, he did not know, and he was
finally through.

In the dank corridor beyond, Vrell revolved his eye-palps and inspected
himself. His body, which had previously borne the shape of a flattened pear,
was now concave underneath. His visual turret, at what would have been the
apex of the pear, felt loose now, and with an effort he found he could move
it. His main shell was also wider, more like the disc-shaped carapace of a
prill, his limbs also longer and sharper. Vrell had not allowed himself to
think about it closely before, but now what was happening to him seemed quite
obvious. The earlier leech bites he had suffered on the island had done
nothing, for an inhibitor was included in the broad-spectrum inoculations he
had given himself before first leaving this ship. But obviously time and his
transformation to adulthood had weakened the effect of those drugs, so they
had not been enough to prevent him being infected by the Spatterjay virus from
those leeches burrowing under his carapace. Now the virus was changing him.
Vrell accepted the fact and shoved it to the back of his mind. Right then he
had more important concerns. He went in search of something to eat.

Anything.

* * * *

Taylor Bloc scanned around the inside of the shuttle, tested the air with an
anosmic detector, and smelt that recognizable odour as of an open ancient
tomb. In the passenger compartment, besides himself, there were twelve
reifications—four of which wore the grey enviro-suits and protective
breastplates of his Kladites. Aesop and Bones were not present, having gone on
ahead to make arrangements for Bloc’s arrival. Of the Hoopers, one was an Old
Captain by the name of Ron, whom one of Bloc’s agents here had hired, two were
perhaps crewmen, but the fourth—a Hooper in outworld dress who seemed to spend
a lot of time talking to a box on his shoulder—looked very familiar. Bloc
tried to remember where he had seen that face before, but it kept on escaping
him. Obviously he was not anyone of importance. Bloc was about to dismiss such
speculation when the Kladite sitting alongside him turned to him.

‘Forgive my intrusion, Taylor Bloc, but I’ve been watching him too. It is
destiny,’ said the reif.

Bloc paused for a long moment before replying, just to make sure this Kladite
understood his insolence in speaking without first being addressed. ‘Yes,
destiny,’ he said, though having no idea what the reif meant.

Obviously encouraged the Kladite continued, ‘A great friend of Keech himself,
and he who assisted Erlin in her resurrection of him.’

As Bloc sat mulling that over, his mind seemed slow. Perhaps it was time for
him to add some memory space. Perhaps the last fifty years of memories were
spilling into the spaces his memcording used to run copies of his organic
mental programs. He was about to run a cerebral diagnostic check from other
programs, additional to his memcording, when what the Kladite had just told
him impacted.

OUTPARAFUNCT: B.P. PRESSURE INCREASE NOT REQ

His fight-or-flight reflex, which in his organic body would have caused a
surge of adrenalin and consequent increase in his heart rate, caused his
internal balm pump to accelerate. That was not supposed to happen.

INFORM: STABILIZE, he instructed.

His heart would have been thundering, but now, motionless with its valves open
and preserving balm flooding round and through it, it just endured.

Janer Cord Anders.

He should have known, since he had long ago formatted his memory so as never
to forget a face that might be important to him. Here was the other one they
had been searching for—and coming to them of his own free will. It was indeed
destiny: further proof that he was the one to lead all reifications to the
Little Flint and to resurrection. He felt in that instant the truth of his own
status, and knew that in time all reifications would come to understand what
he was, and what he was doing for them. Bloc undid his safety straps, jerked
himself out of his seat and walked over. As he drew close to Anders, he saw
that the box on the man’s shoulder contained hornets.

Epiphany.

‘You are Janer Cord Anders,’ he said, catching hold of the back of the man’s
seat.

Anders looked up. ‘I certainly am.’

‘Might I enquire why you are on this flight?’

‘I’m here with Ron.’ Anders gestured to the Old Captain. ‘I was hoping for a
place on the ship. My friend here,’ he tapped the hornet box, ‘is not so
enamoured of the idea, but my remit does allow for a little travelling.’

‘Of course you will join the Sable Keech; it is inevitable. I did make an
offer on the AI nets for your presence, some years ago. I am trying in my
modest way to match many aspects of the Arisen One’s original journey, so I
would be glad to have you aboard.’

OUTPARAFUNCT: YABBER$@~*

MEMSPACE: 00055

Bloc tilted his head: another one. It had to be caused by his additional
hardware and software, as such code corruptions were usually unheard of in
reification software. He ran a high-speed diagnostic of the three open
channels from his internal control unit. The results did not make a lot of
sense. He tried linking through one channel, briefly saw bony hands sharpening

a knife. He realized then that the problem was being caused by feedback from
the most recently opened channel: a kind of madness, something waking up.
After a second he refocused on the man before him.

Anders had tilted his head, listening to his hivelink. He frowned, showed a
flash of irritation, and said, ‘Then you have me.’ He paused for a moment.
‘I’m informed that you are Taylor Bloc?’

‘I am,’ Bloc replied, a little peeved that Janer had not instantly recognized
him.

‘You’re part owner of the ship?’ Janer asked.

Bloc stared at him, for a moment not understanding the question, then he
replied, ‘I am the owner.’ The wash of anger and irritation he felt was
immediate, almost seemed to come from outside him, but of course it did not
show. He was not truly the owner yet, and that would have to soon change. He
nodded to Janer jerkily, turned away, and began running inside himself an
error-search program that though not correcting whatever the fault was, would
at least clear some of the junk out of his mind. Slowly he returned to his
seat.

‘You’ve recruited him?’ the Kladite asked.

‘I. . . have.’

‘He was not already with us?’

Bloc held up a hand. ‘It was destined.’

‘That is good.’

The Kladite faced forwards again, bearing no expression on his frozen and
preserved face, but his mere actions told Bloc enough. He realized that
whatever was wrong with himself was showing. This too would have to change.

* * * *

The sail finally put Erlin down on top of a small atoll, while its two
companions scattered a colony of frog whelks that had been clinging just above
the waterline a few metres below her. She could hear the strange squealing of
the whelks and the thunderous splashing as they propelled themselves away from
the coral face. Glancing aside, she saw one of them smack its fleshy foot down
on the water and bounce again. But one of the sails snatched it up on its next
bounce. The pair of sails returned with two whelks each, broke open the shells
and began to dine on their still living occupants. Erlin eyed their dinner for
a moment—not feeling quite the same about whelks any more—then turned her
attention to the sail who had carried her. Only then did she finally grasp
what some part of her brain had been trying to tell her for some time.

‘You’re Golem?’ she asked.

‘They are insentient so, essentially, neither truly alive nor truly subject to
Death,’ the sail replied.

Erlin gazed at the Golem sail, then realized it was staring down at the other
two sails as they dined. A Golem sail that was squeamish?

‘I said you’re Golem,’ Erlin suggested.

‘I’m Zephyr,’ the sail replied, its gaze still fixed.

Erlin stood up, stretched her legs and rubbed her aching shoulders. ‘So,
Zephyr, I’d have thought it would be easier for you to take me to Olian’s, or
else drop me aboard some ship in that area. But it seems you’ve been taking me
away from civilization.’

Zephyr turned its head towards her, then tossed a harness onto the stone
beside her. ‘Put that on.’

‘Why?’

The sail gave a twisted shrug, as if in pain. ‘I can carry you as before, but
you might find the journey uncomfortable. There is no risk to your life.
Distance ... is long.’

‘I don’t want to go on a long journey.’

The Golem sail gave that same distorted shrug and began to extend its wings.

‘Wait.’ Erlin stooped and took up the contrivance of plasmesh straps. It was
something like a parachute harness but with a grip bar or handle at the back
where the parachute should be. She started to don it, but slowly to give
herself time.

‘Where are we going?’

‘Mortuary Island.’

‘Why there?’ Erlin asked, not wanting to reveal that she had no idea what or
where this place was.

‘Because that is where the dead live and where we have been paid to take you.’

‘You’re kidnapping me?’

Again the shrug, this time with bowed head. ‘Relocating . . . you.’ The head
came up again. ‘I saved your life. I beat your Death.’

‘I’m grateful for that. But now you are taking me somewhere I don’t want to
go. That’s kidnapping.’

‘There is worse.’

One of the other sails hawked and coughed up a piece of whelk shell. ‘We could
always take her back where we found her, if this gets too messy,’ it
suggested.

‘Oh, I’ll come,’ Erlin said quickly. ‘I see I haven’t much choice in the
matter.’ She finished doing up her straps.

‘Should we feed her?’ asked the third sail, nudging the remains of its dinner
with a clawed toe.

‘Do you require food, Erlin Taser Three Indomial?’

Erlin eyed the chewed leftovers. ‘Not right now.’

‘Then we must go.’

The Golem sail launched itself, blasting shell fragments from the top of the
atoll with the down-draught of its wings. Erlin turned, and it grabbed the
handle at her back and pulled her into the sky.

‘How far to Mortuary Island?’ she shouted as the other two sails then launched
with much noise and flurry.

‘It is in the Cable Sea, beyond the Norbic Atolls.’ Erlin swore, and realized
that at some point she would need to eat whatever was offered her. That, she
knew, was thousands of kilometres away.

* * * *

Ambel gazed through his binoculars at the island, inspecting the damage,
looking for any sign of Erlin—or maybe bits of Erlin. Judging by the mess he
could see, she was probably dead, but he was not feeling that yet. Actually,
accepting someone’s death was not a trait to which Old Captains could grow
accustomed—most of their own fellows being so long-lived and indestructible.

‘Lower the boat,’ he instructed Peck, who as ever was hovering at the
Captain’s shoulder.

He glanced round at the rest of the crew, but none of them would meet his
gaze. Sprout and Pillow unstrapped the rowing boat from the side of the ship
and began feeding rope into pulleys to lower it to the sea. Ambel returned to
the outer wall of his cabin, and unhooked from it his blunderbuss and bags of
powder and stones. He loaded the weapon, tearing off the end of a paper
cartridge and feeding it down the barrel, next shoving in wadding and pouring
in some stones, then more wadding. He primed it and pulled back the hammer.

‘Let’s see what we’ve got here before we get all morbid,’ he suggested.

He hung the ‘buss across his back by a strap and scrambled down the ladder.
While Peck peered over the side at them, Anne and the juniors—Sprout, Sild and
Pillow—followed Ambel down. They were also armed: Anne carried a powerful
laser carbine she had found on Skinner’s Island—no longer needed by the Batian
mercenaries who had gone there with Rebecca Frisk and run afoul of Hooper
vengeance; Sprout carried a machete, and the other two lugged heavy clubs.
Once they were all seated in the boat, Ambel took up the reinforced oars and
began to row.

‘What do you think happened?’ Anne eventually asked.

Staring straight back at the Treader, Ambel replied, ‘Any number of things
spring to mind, but by the look of the wreckage I would guess something from
the deeps paid a visit. We’ll know soon enough.’

Soon they were into shallows and with a glimpse over the side Ambel noted a
lack of whelks in the vicinity. He began to feel a heaviness in his chest; the
signs were not good. Beaching the boat he gave a further two heaves on the
oars to pull it up onto the sand, then climbed out.

‘We’ll stick together for the moment,’ he said, all practicality. ‘Let’s see
what we’ve got here first.’

Eyeing the wreckage of Erlin’s home, the five advanced. They began to search
under its deflated walls, to pick through broken equipment and furniture, and
turn over anything large enough to conceal human remains.

‘Ambel,’ Anne called him over.

He came to stand next to her and gazed down at whelkish remains driven into
the hard ground. He stooped and rubbed away some of the dirt, to reveal the
shell pattern.

‘Very well,’ he said heavily. ‘You collect what’s salvageable and take it back
to the ship. Me an’ these lads’ll take a look across the island. Tell Boris to
bring the Treader round to the other side to pick us up.’

‘Is that such a good plan?’ Anne wondered. ‘Perhaps we should all leave right
now.’

Ambel turned to her. ‘Erlin could be injured and holed up somewhere. I know
the chances are remote, but I have to look.’ He glanced back at the waves.
Maybe what had done this still lurked there below the surface, but that was a
risk he was prepared to take. He still hoped to find some sign, some message .
. . something.

‘Come on, lads, we’ll spread out and cover as much ground as we can.’ He
turned and began trudging inland, bellowing, ‘Erlin! Are you here, woman!’

* * * *

Taylor Bloc eyed the Kladites arrayed in neat ranks before him, unarmed. They
all wore cloth or domino masks, grey envirosuits with incorporated
breastplates, while skirted helmets hung at their belts. As they raised their
hands before them and started chanting ‘Bloc! Bloc! Bloc!’ he strode out onto
the ramp waving one hand in greeting. This small army of eighty reifications
he had gathered from the remnants of the Cult of Anubis Arisen on Klader, and
they had all sworn loyalty to him for his promise to lead them to
resurrection. Out of choice they wore a uniform created by one of their
number. It was sad, though fortunate for him, Bloc felt, that even amongst the
unliving there were those who felt the need to be led.

A few Hoopers stood to one side, watching the show with bemused expressions.
Of the rest of the crowd, the largest proportion consisted of unaligned
reifications—merely passengers—but there were others here too.

Bloc spotted the mercenary he knew only as Shive—an employee of Lineworld
Developments. The catadapt was tall, thickly muscled, boosted and, now
grinning, his leonine visage exposing curved fangs. Bloc surveyed the
gathering, easily picking out the rest of the mercenaries; they wore black
crabskin armour and made no pretence at concealment. He repressed his anger;
though he had always expected Lineworld Developments to try to take over, it
was doubly insulting that they used Batian mercenaries. These were members of
an entire culture of one continent, on an Out-Polity planet, revolving around
that frowned-upon profession. They had also, in the employ of the Eight, spent
seven hundred years trying to find and destroy Sable Keech himself.

The chanting finally came to a halt and, turning up his volume, Bloc began to
speak. ‘Kladites, I thank you for your greeting, and your enthusiasm for our
great venture. We have come here to walk in the footsteps of Sable Keech,
seeking resurrection. It is—’ There came a guffaw from one of the mercenaries.
‘It is a great thing we do, but I will save the speeches for later. Right now

there is much work to be done.’

Spying Aesop and Bones walking up through the ranks, easily recognizable by
their hooded green flak jackets, Bloc walked down to join them. His internal
search program now nearly clearing the clutter from his mind, he could link to
them easily, but chose instead to speak.

‘How did they get here?’ he immediately asked.

‘They came in the first shuttle, directly from orbit, disguised as
reifications,’ Aesop hissed in reply.

‘As expected,’ murmured Bloc. ‘And the weapons.’

‘They were under guard before we got
chief mercenary, Shive, release them
job to ensure the safety of all, and
with laser carbines was something he

here. We of course demanded that the
to us, but he refused. He said it was his
that a bunch of amateurs running around
didn’t consider safe.’

‘No matter. How many mercenaries?’

‘Only eighteen, but they are all heavily armed.’

‘Weapons?’

‘As required for their mission: projectile weapons that can destroy
reifications and kill Hoopers,’ Aesop replied.

Bloc nodded creakily. ‘Not nearly enough, then.’

Eighteen mercenaries so armed was plenty enough against eighty unarmed
Kladites. The rest in this crowd were all free citizens, pilgrims come here
with one hope. Some of them might have had military or criminal or security
backgrounds, but he had no idea of their loyalties, and so for the present
discounted them. Unlike Aesop and Bones, they did not belong to him. However,
it was all moot.

‘It doesn’t matter, I have prepared for this. We have the means ...’ he said,
more confidently than he felt. He glanced around to find six Kladites had
moved into a rank behind him, and the rest of the crowd was dispersing. ‘Tell
me the rest.’

‘The Golem are hard at work and will complete the ship on schedule,’ Aesop
replied. ‘All but ten reifs have paid their reservation fees, rental
agreements on accommodation and initial bids on tickets for the first voyage.
As expected, a lot of them did not bring supplies of an Intertox inhibitor
that works in reification balm. Of course, with the journey’s distance and
time now extended, those who miss the first voyage will require further
supplies and will also have to pay for extended rental agreements. Even before
the Sable Keech reaches its destination, Lineworld will already be in profit.’

‘Yes, as was always their intention, but all profits are allocated as
investment in future voyages, and stand separate from initial investment
costs,’ said Bloc. ‘How are we now with that?’

‘The cost of transporting materials and passengers has pushed us near to the
limit,’ Aesop replied.

‘That the mercenaries have made no further move means Lineworld is waiting for
us to go over that limit, then they can legally take over. Because they work
from within the Polity, their actions here on the Line must have at least the
gloss of legality.’ Bloc felt the situation was perhaps the best he could have
hoped for. He had expected Lineworld to find some way of pushing up costs, and
there were many ways they could have done that. By relocating the enterprise
they had untied his hands. There were things he could do now he would not have
dared on Chel Island. ‘Take me to the ship now. I want to see.’

Aesop turned and led the way through the sprawl of Polity accommodation units
and a buzz of activity. Bloc noted the fences erected to keep the denizens of
the dingle at bay, and some guard towers occupied by Batians. A few stalls and
kiosks here were selling food and drink, but most sold various items of Polity
technology that reifications might require. This too was part of the
enterprise—a hugely profitable part for Lineworld. That organization was also
raking in a profit from the currency exchange system he had arranged with
Olian’s. Contractually that made no difference to the initial investment, but
then Lineworld’s contracts served one purpose: they were the tip of a wedge
into profitable enterprises started by others on the edge of the Polity. They
invested, then took over—that was their whole ethos.

They came to a gate leading out of the temporary town warded by two more
mercenaries who smilingly opened it for them. The Kladites now drew in closer
around Bloc and keenly eyed the dingle either side of the path winding
downslope.

‘There’s a good view from over here, unless you want to go down?’ Aesop
pointed to a narrow side path.

Bloc waved him on.

Soon they emerged on an outcrop above a drop, and gazed down at the Sable
Keech.

Only the keel and ribs of the ship were yet in place, resting on the ramp
leading down to the sea. Those working on it gleamed brightly, and were as
skeletal as what they were constructing. Either side of the construction site,
and reaching back to below where Bloc was standing, just about every tree had
been felled. A sawmill, open to the air, was in constant operation; clouds of
wood dust boiling out from it and turning its surroundings into powdery
desert. He observed where the masts were being assembled from bubble-metal
sections. He noted stacked crates, some of them the size of houses. These
contained bubble-metal gears and trains, electric motors, laminar batteries
and solar cells, bearings and all the paraphernalia that would allow three
living sails to control the mass of other monofabric sails the masts would
carry. The ship, when finished, would be nearly a kilometre long, carry nine
huge masts, five hundred kilometres of rigging, square kilometres of sail, and
seven hundred passengers and crew (one for each year Sable Keech had been
dead). It would be enormous, a triumph and, most importantly for Lineworld,
very expensive to travel on.

‘I am happy to see this,’ said Bloc flatly. ‘Now, to my quarters, where we
must finalize plans.’ He nodded slowly. ‘I will not lose what is mine.’

Bones sniggered in his hood at this.

Bloc gazed at the reif for a moment, and in response Bones jerked upright as
if a lead attached to him had been snapped taut. Bloc turned back to Aesop.
‘We move tonight—ahead of plan.’

‘I’ll have to check that the . . . item is ready,’ Aesop replied.

‘No need. Can’t you feel it?’

Reif or not, the way Aesop then reacted looked something like a shudder.

‘It bothers you?’ Bloc asked.

‘A gun is so much more reliable,’ Aesop replied.

‘Guns are not a luxury we have at the moment, but we do have something
better,’ said Bloc, moving on.

* * * *

Tarsic damned the fault in his cleansing unit that drove him to take on any
job on offer so as to remain a viable reification. There were cleansing units
available here, but renting time on them was expensive. The five times he had
used them had made a severe dent in his funds, which were already depleted by
paying for his reservation, ticket bid and the steep accommodation costs.
Anywhere else, he might have been able to forgo having his own small dwelling,
but here that meant you stayed outside the compound. Some reifs were
attempting that, and he heard that one of them had been swallowed whole by a
giant leech. The woman had remained in contact via her aug as the leech
digested her corpse. Then the contact broke when the leech, it was surmised,
went into the sea. Others were losing portions of their precious flesh to
leeches all the time, while the Spatterjay virus was rapidly eating away the
rest of their preserved bodies. But now there was some hope for himself, and
also his companions Beric and Sline.

After he was killed in an AGC accident on Klader, his grieving wife had
cryo-stored Tarsic’s body. Her conversion to what was then the Cult of Anubis
Arisen occurred some years later. She then paid for a download from his frozen
brain to crystal, and subsequently his reification. Her own reification, after
death by suicide—her being anxious to become a full member of the Cult—had
proved unsuccessful. Tarsic then immediately looked into getting himself
installed in a Golem chassis, but discovered just how much of a bitch his wife
had been. A deferred debt was awaiting him, and the moment he ceased to be a
reification that debt became due and would result in his utter bankruptcy. So
in his Golem chassis he would have ended up indentured to the Cult for years—a
group which had since come to look upon him with contempt, for he was perhaps
unique in remaining a reification out of financial motives. It surprised him
when Aesop, assistant to Taylor Bloc himself, who had bought out the Cult when
it effectively collapsed as a going concern, had approached him.

Tarsic turned, as he proceeded, to check that Beric and Sline were still with
him. Just about all the reifs here regularly went down to see the ship being
built, just as worshippers would have once ventured forth to observe the
construction of a cathedral—the feeling was much the same. Tarsic and his
companions had already been there a couple of times. However, it was not so
usual for reifs to venture out during the night, as that was when the big
leeches were most active. The guards would be suspicious, as they were of any

unusual activity. As the three approached the gates, one of the two Batian
guards stepped forwards.

‘Strange to see you out after dark. Shouldn’t you be in shutdown mode or’—the
female guard paused to say the next word with distaste—‘cleansing?’

‘Our night vision is good,’ Tarsic replied. ‘And we’ve concluded that we
prefer to view the construction in a less religious atmosphere.’

The woman smiled. ‘Not a Kladite then?’

Tarsic held his hands out from his sides, ‘Do I look like one of those
fanatics? Where’s my Kervox breastplate and skirted helmet, and my permanent
link to the wise words of Taylor Bloc?’

‘Well, you might be in disguise,’ she suggested.

‘You’re auged.’ Tarsic raised a shaky finger and pointed to the white
bone-effect aug behind her right ear. ‘They’ll certainly have some kind of
record on me. My name is Tarsic Alleas Smith . . .’

The woman tilted her head. After a moment she nodded. ‘I see. Years working
off a debt to the Cult, then to Taylor Bloc . . . and you’re known as a
troublemaker amongst reifs. You’ll do.’ She signalled to her companion to open
the gate for them.

When the three were some distance from the compound, heading down the path
leading to the ship’s construction site, Beric opined, ‘She’d think
differently if she knew precisely where we are going.’

Tarsic agreed. It was all about the balance of power here. With the Batians
being armed, Taylor Bloc could not augment his own forces without the
mercenaries finding out and perhaps doing something drastic. But Bloc had
prepared. Apparently the Kladites here, and the weapons Shive had put under
guard, were merely a decoy. Down there, in a crate to which Tarsic now held
the computerized key, were fifty armed reifs awaiting their moment.

Soon they came in sight of the sailing ship and the glinting movement of Golem
working in the moonlight. There was no electric lighting—the Golem needed
none. It would be nice, Tarsic thought, if Bloc could get them on his side.

They were neutral however; here under contract from Cybercorp to perform their
singular task. Tarsic led the way to the left, away from the ship, through the
ankle-deep sawdust. Soon the crates loomed out of the dark, like an infant
city with its power cut. He followed a map lit on the small screen of the key
and eventually came to the crate indicated. He eyed the looming bubble-metal
wall before him and tracked round, locating the seal clips.

‘Let’s get it open,’ he said.

Beric and Sline moved forwards, taking crowbars from under their jackets.
Beric began levering off the clips down one edge, while Sline used them on the
other edge as a ladder to the crate’s top. The pieces of sprung metal cracked
and spanged out into the night. These had been pressed into place on the end
of the crate to keep up the pressure on its seals while it was in transit in a
lower-cost unpressurized cargo hold. Every time a clip went, Tarsic expected
someone to come running. No one came.

‘All done?’ he asked, when his two companions stepped away from the crate.

‘They’re moving about in there,’ said Beric.

‘I thought they’d be in shutdown,’ added Sline.

‘They were shut down, so Aesop told me, but they recently woke. That’s why we
are here now.’ Tarsic pointed the key at the crate and sent over the unlocking
code.

‘Hang on a minute,’ said Sline. ‘Why lock them in a crate with no way of
getting themselves out?’

With a hiss of equalizing pressures, the end of the crate jerked open and
began to come down like a ramp. It was utterly dark inside. Tarsic had
expected light. He considered Sline’s question and realized he possessed no
easy answers. But, being so happy over the promise of new cleansing units for
the three of them and a confirmed reservation on the ship’s first voyage, he
had not thought to question.

The crate end settled on the ground with a dull whump, stirring up a small
storm of sawdust. The darkness within it seemed packed with thick loops of
something that shifted with a sound as of rocks grinding together. He realized
he was seeing something segmented, maybe two metres thick, crammed into this
box in coils. One loop of it began to unravel out of shadow, then something

horrible exploded out then up into the night like a demonic jack-in-a-box.
Tarsic gazed up into an open cowl of armour plates containing two vertical
rows of hot red eyes. Glassy limbs and other sharp appendages ground and
clattered together before those eyes like scythes being sharpened. Tarsic
stumbled backwards, not comprehending what he was seeing. Sline made a strange
keening sound as the terrible hood drenched him in its shadow, then came down
like a cupped hand, slamming him to the earth and trapping him underneath. A
ripping tearing sucking and disgorging ensued.

‘That hooder must be very hungry,’ said Beric, his tone utterly flat. ‘They
normally feed a lot slower than that.’

‘Hooder?’ said Tarsic, still backing up.

Beric turned to him wearily. ‘There’s no point running—and we’re lucky that we
feel no pain.’

The creature reared again, dripping reif balm and scattering the now clean
bones and various metallic additions that had enabled Sline to survive long
after his own death. Beric bowed his head as it slid above him, the rest of
the long armoured body uncoiling from its prison, then came down on him like
an immense fly swat. Tarsic turned and ran, trying not to hear the horrible
gobbling sounds, but he too was quickly smashed down and trapped in hot red
shadow, surrounded by a thousand ever-shifting knives. As they closed on him
and began cutting, error messages started to burn his night vision. He shut
the messages off. Eventually, as the hooder severed his power cables, he went
into shutdown knowing now that all hope of the resurrection of his human body
was gone. He had just watched it disappear piece by piece into a thousand
hungry little mouths.

* * * *

5

Glister:
glisters bear a striking resemblance to lobsters, though with more fins and
other adaptations to oceanic life, even though, like many of Spatterjay’s sea
creatures, they do venture ashore. They travel in pods of between three and
twenty: one dominant female and the rest of them males. Adolescent males
remain solitary, but on becoming adult and therefore sexually active, they are
recruited by a female to her pod. The theory has yet to be proven that this
mating behaviour developed due to there being some viral infection in male
glisters—the female ejecting any infected male seed, and only allowing

virus-free matings to fertilize her eggs. Like lobsters, glister females
attach their eggs to their under-carapace until they hatch. One hundred and
forty varieties of glister have been catalogued, some no larger than a prawn
and others up to three metres long. They are obviously successful as a
species—fossilized glister shell is a sought-after gem on the planet — but
individually their lives are usually short and brutal. Hoopers relish their
meat and, because a glister contains psychoactive chemicals in its mouth and
brainpan, they usually roast the animal alive, as the only other way to
effectively kill it is to smash in its skull, which releases these same
chemicals into its flesh. Sometimes Hoopers do deliberately kill glisters by
breaking open the head, usually as a precursor to some orgiastic celebration.
However, the greatest predator of glisters is by far the molly carp —

Tasting the air, Vrell sought food. All that remained of his own kin, within
the spaceship, was empty carapaces and dried gristle, but he still ate those
for the vital minerals and calcium they provided. He found things tough and
fibrous as wood creeping slowly in hidden crevices, and chomped them, too,
with the relish of starvation. Only later did he realize they were the burnt
and broken remains of his father’s human blanks, now transformed by the
Spatterjay virus. There was however one female blank, complete but for the
loss of a hand, shut down by her thrall, yet not beyond being returned to
human shape. She had obviously been feeding like a leech, mindlessly, until
hunger felled her, but she still lived. The Prador snipped her into pieces
with his claws and gobbled down the still-quivering flesh. Only then, with the
mind-numbing hunger inside him partially quelled, did he begin to think
straight. Immediately he regretted the stupidity of his voracious hunger, for
that last blank, once he managed to suborn Father’s control units, would have
made a useful tool. And with a little more self-control he could have found
meat elsewhere, since the ship carried supplies of it. Now he headed straight
for them.

The chilling units in the ship’s larder must have recently failed, for the
stored meat was spoiling and crawling with ship’s lice. He ate anyway, spoilt
meat being a Prador’s preferred diet. Champing through a slab of meat carved
from a food animal of his home planet—a decapod engineered with lungs and
internal strengthening that enabled it to grow huge on a diet of kelp—Vrell
observed other delicacies hanging along one rack. Only three of these human
bodies had spoilt and, eyeing the tatters of clothing still clinging to them,
Vrell realized they must have been snatched from some human settlement rather
than specially bred back in the Kingdom. The other five humans, having been
bred as blanks before being harvested for food because of some defect,
contained the Spatterjay virus and had therefore retained some life. Because
of their particular damage, changes were in fact being wrought upon them by
the virus.

Four of the bodies were headless, and the fifth without limbs as well. Vrell
recalled having snipped away these heads and limbs for Ebulan’s delectation
during their voyage here. The first four were now, since the failure of the
chillers, growing leech mouths from the severed flesh of their necks. The
fifth one was also growing them from where its limbs had been. All of them
were constantly moving; writhing slowly on the meat hooks jammed through their
ribcages. Vrell knew that, without those hooks, these five would be squirming

about on the floor, probably feeding on the other comestibles available here.

He considered a possible option. The coring process entailed the removal of
the animal’s higher cerebrum and much of its autonomous nervous system. To
then turn the animal into a useful tool required the connection of a Prador
thrall unit in place of what had been removed. The Prador had found that such
drastic measures were only required in Kingdom animals to prevent any
wetware/hardware conflicts when making them do something that went against
their instinct. The disadvantage to this was the loss of autonomous function.
Only certain uncored animals—made to do simple tasks—could be controlled by
spider thralls which burrowed in where required and connected to the nervous
system. Adapting humans to either process had been difficult, as it was
discovered that both methods of enslavement usually killed the host. That was
until Jay Hoop cornered the market in humans infected by the Spatterjay virus,
who proved tough and difficult to kill. Ebulan, to his cost, discovered too
late that spider thralls could be rejected by the bodies of older Hoopers. For
them only a full coring was safe.

Finishing his megafauna steak, Vrell continued eyeing the five human bodies
busily making their transformation into the leech form. The fifth, limbless
one, would be effectively useless, so he reached up and plucked it down, then
cut its tough fibrous flesh into pieces and began inserting them one after the
other into his mandibles. Perhaps, even though their nervous systems would be
severely degraded by the leech transformation, he might be able to get some
use out of the remaining four. Abruptly he spun towards the door.

As Vrell stepped out into the dripping corridor something cracked along his
back. He turned an eye-palp, together with his visual turret and mouthparts,
which had now separated from his main carapace and risen on a short muscular
neck, and observed a long split in his shell, which was now knitting with
fibres almost like hull repair mesh. It occurred to him that he had never
heard of one of his own kind infected by the virus. Ingesting infected meat
would not work because the virus did not long survive in the vitriol that was
a Prador’s digestive juices. The only way a Prador could become infected was
by inoculation through the shell itself, as had happened to him. But surely
some adult Prador would have therefore tried the virus on its own offspring?
He must check the ship’s data banks to see if any mention had been made of
such. But not now: time to go to work.

* * * *

Erlin smashed the frog whelk’s shell with a rock, pulled off the eye-stalks
because they were gazing at her accusingly, then took out her pen laser and
began cooking its flesh. In the twilight, the glare from the device was
intense, and she noted the two normal sails edge back from her as they dined
on their molluscs. But Zephyr was unmoved, having nothing to fear from the
laser. After a moment the device sputtered and gave out, the whelk flesh only
partially seared. Erlin had expected this, as she had used it twice before:
once on a chunk of rhinoworm and once on another whelk. She had no problem
eating raw meat, but had been using the laser rather more to pasteurize than

cook it. The less of the virus she took in orally, the slower would be the
change it wrought upon her. Already her skin had taken on a bluish tint, and
some of her inclinations were edging towards the irrational. But one
uncomfortable fact seemed plain to her: she had known about the giant whelk.

Was her memory playing tricks? No, she and Ambel had talked about that
creature jokily named Whelkus titanicus, and she recollected reading about it
in one of the Warden’s many reports on Spatterjay’s ecology. How then to
account for her behaviour on the island? That was easy. She was not immune to
the ennui of long life—it had driven her here to find Ambel in the first
place—but she had thought herself immune to the near-suicidal pursuits to
which that boredom drove others. Obviously she was not, though in her the
impulse to self-destruction was unconscious. Her own mind was playing her
false. Erlin grimaced. Could that also be why she remained here on this
dangerous planet? Was she, rather than trying to learn how to live from
Captain Ambel, just staying in a place where it would be easy to die?

Damn it, enough of this!

‘You know, Windcheater won’t be best pleased with you,’ she said abruptly,
before stuffing her mouth with warm meat.

‘The pleasure of that particular sail is not my concern,’ replied Zephyr, who
had his wings folded now. During previous landings in daylight he would spread
them, blotting out the sun and casting a shadow across wherever they landed.
This confirmed for Erlin that their fabric was photo-active and he had been
feeding that way—no doubt to complement the power supplies he already
contained.

Erlin nodded, wiped her wet chin. ‘He hasn’t established any laws as yet, so
the right of might still rules here. Do you think you’re strong enough to go
up against him, or against Ambel, or any of the other Old Captains?’

‘None of them know where she is.’ Speaking to Zephyr, Puff indicated Erlin
with one claw.

Erlin turned. ‘Until Sniper, our present Warden, spots you, for he has many
eyes. He’ll be even less inclined to non-interference than the old Warden.
He’ll certainly let the Old Captains know, and might even do something drastic
himself.’

The two normal sails looked to Zephyr for guidance.

‘You feel that you are important,’ the Golem sail stated.

Erlin frowned, realizing how arrogant she had sounded. It probably stemmed
from her utter self-absorption.

Zephyr continued, almost dreamily, ‘As of only a few days ago, Sniper ceased
to be Spatterjay’s Warden, and the old Warden, now back in control, has too
many other concerns. No one is coming to rescue you, Erlin, so you might as
well finish your meal and get some sleep. We still have a long way to travel.’

Erlin did as suggested. She knew there was no way out of this until they
reached Mortuary Island, and at least during that time, her destiny was out of
her own control. However, when they did arrive there she was going to damned
well stir up some trouble. She lay down on hard stone and was soon sleeping
fitfully, dreaming that a giant whelk was bearing down on her out of the
darkness.

In deepest dark, the moon gone from the sky, she was woken by a hard
scrabbling sound, and opened bleary eyes to look up at Zephyr. The sail’s eyes
were black hollows directed behind her and to one side.

‘Sentience is life. Intelligence is anti-Death,’ the Golem sail whispered.

‘What? What’s that?’

She flinched away as the turquoise flash of a particle cannon ignited the
night. The scrabbling became a clattering as something fell down the side of
the atoll. Huff launched and dropped out of sight, finally returning with a
large glister, its front end a charred hollow. The glow in Zephyr’s eyes
slowly went out. Remembering her earlier exchange with the Golem sail, it
occurred to Erlin that Zephyr probably ranked quite high up on the scale of
the mighty . . . and the deranged.

* * * *

The darkness, Ambel felt, reflected his mood. Leaning on the ship’s rail, he
gazed across at the island and wondered what the hell he was going to do. For
some years Erlin had somehow defined his life, and now she was gone he felt
without purpose—disjointed from his ‘long habit of living’. He was calm—a
bulwark of calm rested at the centre of his being, steadily built, layer upon
layer, over the centuries he had lived—but there was no completion here, as

there never was when someone died such a pointless death. Vengeance was no
good to him. If they remained here, even though on the other side of the
island from Erlin’s encampment, the creature that had taken her might attack
the Treader, and he very much doubted they could survive such an onslaught.
And if they sailed away to obtain the equipment he would need to kill such a
monster, it would likely be gone by the time they returned. Anyway, it had
been defending its young and, though the creature was no doubt ancient and
canny, there was unlikely to be any real malice in it.

‘Peck,’ he said, without looking round. ‘Get the anchor up—time we were away
from here.’

He heard Peck’s sigh as the crewman headed away, his shouted orders, the
rattling of the anchor chain, then the inevitable cursing as whoever had been
given the task clubbed away whatever had come up on the chain.

Ambel turned. ‘Galegrabber, take us out!’ he called.

The sail, which until then had been perched high on the mast because it could
smell the creature that had probably gobbled up Erlin, cautiously lowered
itself back into position and gripped its various handholds. It turned to the
wind, turned the other masts to present their fabric sails to the wind, and
the Treader eased round. Ambel glanced to the bridge, where Anne controlled
the helm. He ignored her querying look and headed for his cabin. He closed and
locked the door behind him, unstrapped his blunderbuss and placed it on his
table, then went to his sea chest to remove a silvery Polity device. It was
hemispherical, inlaid with touch controls. Placing it flat side down next to
his weapon, he clicked down one control and waited, still and utterly patient.
It took half an hour before, with a slight whisper and a flicker of light,
Captain Sprage materialized in the cabin.

‘Well then,’ said the other Old Captain, sparking up his pipe with a laser
lighter.

Ambel felt sure he could smell the tobacco, but the holographic conferencing
device was on a low power setting, so produced only sound and image.

‘Erlin was taken by a titanicus. It seems she grabbed one of its young for
dissection,’ said Ambel woodenly.

‘Taken? You mean dead.’

‘Yes. I searched the island. She’s gone.’

‘Not clever, taking one of their young.’

Ambel felt a surge of irritation, repressed it. ‘I was the fool. I assumed she
would know not to do something like that. Because of me she is dead ... or
maybe even worse.’

‘Seems to me you’re still a bit attracted to the idea of guilt,’ said Sprage.

‘Only when I’m guilty.’

‘Really, then I wonder who it was that Verlan spotted being carried off east
of you by a bloody great big Golem sail called Zephyr?’

‘Ah . . .’ said Ambel.

* * * *

It was one of Bloc’s sidekicks, clad in a hooded flak jacket over a uniform
grey envirosuit. Shive knocked the shrivelled hand away from his shoulder and
swore.

‘Sorry, friend,’ said the reif, and moved on.

Shive sniffed the crabskin armour at his shoulder. Some horrible stink. He
would have to disinfect it later. Had he his own way here, he would take a
flame-thrower to the lot of them. It was unnatural keeping one’s body going
like that after death. Bloody things should load to Golem chassis or clones,
or biostructs, or any of the more natural alternatives available. He continued
on about his nightly patrol around the fence, to check the guard posts and
make sure his people were not slacking. Few of them did so now, ever since
Saolic had lost one side of his face to a leech the size of a potato sack.
Shive knew, from his check of Batian records, that this was a dangerous place.
It had eaten up a small group of mercenaries led by one Svan who had been a
soldier like himself, very efficient and capable. He did not like the rumours
he had heard about what might have happened to her.

Reaching the gates he approached the two guards. ‘Anything to report?’

‘Three deadbeats went through earlier, Commander, but I checked one of them
out and his reasons were valid—not a Kladite and having no love for Bloc,
according to his record. I think to the normal reifs the Kladites reek the
same as they all do to us.’

‘You mustn’t judge them so harshly. Everyone has a right to their own beliefs
no matter how imbecilic.’

‘Why, yes, Commander.’

Shive grinned and was about to move on. Then he frowned. This was after all
the first night Bloc was here and, though Shive had this area sewn up, he
would not put it past the reif to try something rash. He keyed the comlink at
his collar.

‘Saden, three reifs down your way. I guess you’ve got them in your sights, but
if not, find them and see what they’re about.’ He paused. ‘Saden, if you’re
chewing some of that damned squeaky weed again I’ll come down there personally
and pull out your teeth.’ Still no response. Shive turned to the guard again.
‘I want one of you to—’

The entire fence shuddered, scattering sparks, the gates rattling together
behind the two guards. Explosive charge—had to be. Shive switched to general
com.

‘Eyes up and lights on. Watchtowers report.’

One and Two immediately reported in: something had definitely hit the fence.
There was a pause, nothing coming from Three, then Four and Five reported.

‘It took out Tower Three. Something took out Tower Three,’ babbled the watcher
in Four, when given the opportunity.

Shive was already running. ‘I want the response squad to Tower Three, now!’ He
swung his weapon down from his back and gripped it before him. Through his aug
he initiated the link between his vision and the sight on the weapon, then set
the weapon to three-round bursts. When the lights were tardy about coming on,
he was about to set his vision to infrared, but then suddenly they did come

on, flooding the area with light bright as day. The response squad came in
from every direction and by the time Shive reached the third watchtower, all
of them were with him. Only there was no Tower Three.

‘Missile launcher,’ someone suggested.

‘Lights, out on that jungle,’ Shive instructed over com.

Beams stabbed into the close foliage, revealing the wreckage of the tower.
Just then someone started screaming in the shadows beyond. Shive ignored the
sound—it was an old trick probably meant to lure them out. He upped the
magnification of his eyes and studied the ruined tower. If a missile had been
used, it had to have been a zero-burn variety fired from inside the compound,
else the wreckage would be here where he was standing. The screaming stopped.

‘Someone is going to pay for that,’ a trooper muttered.

‘Shut it.’ Shive held up his hand. There was something moving in the dingle.
Big leech, that explained it. The damned thing must have stretched up and torn
down the tower, whose guard deserved whatever had happened to him out there.
He should have paid better attention. Then, concentrating on the presumed
leech as it flowed through the thick undergrowth, Shive saw it consisted of
rigid segments. Something else caught his eye and he looked up and caught a
glimpse of two vertical rows of red eyes.

‘Oh . . . hell,’ someone said slowly.

Shive took a step back, glanced down at his weapon and almost unconsciously
switched it to continuous fire, with the charge in each round unrestricted. He
reasserted self-control, deliberately took that step forwards again.

‘Okay, you in the towers, get down here now. It’s now learnt there’s fresh
meat there so it might attack your towers. Everyone listen,’ he raised his
voice, ‘we’ve got a hooder out there, a small one I estimate, probably about
twenty metres long, and thin, so it’s hungry. Pull back to cover amidst the
buildings, and designated troops break out the armour piercers. When it comes,
hit it with everything we’ve got.’ He turned to the two nearest to him. ‘You
two, with me.’ He headed away, with the two men running behind him. He was
aware, though, that everything his men had got, including the missiles used
for taking out armoured aircars, might still not be enough.

* * * *

Leaning against an inflated wall, Aesop stripped off his transparent surgical
gloves as he observed the watcher scrambling down from Tower One. The hooder
had hit Tower Three, on the other side of the compound, and so hopefully it
would still be over there. But Aesop waited cautiously. Only when he heard the
buzzsaw racket of Batian weapons on full automatic did he head for the nearby
fence.

Bloc was positive that the monster would only go after those marked with the
pheromone extracted from the glands of a certain grazing animal from its home
planet. Thus he had been assured by the lunatic who sold it to him. Aesop felt
Bloc was losing it, and now with the thrall unit inside him not directly under
Bloc’s control, Aesop intended to get as far away as possible while the thing
attacked. All he knew about hooders was that they went for anything moving
and, pheromone or not, everyone was in danger. And since he had spent most of
the day marking Batian mercenaries with the stuff and was himself probably
saturated with its aroma . . .

At the fence Aesop removed a small pen laser from his belt and began to cut.
No one would notice as, with the present furore, all alarms would be
attributed to the hooder attack. It was all damned madness, and it seemed very
likely to him that many would not survive it. Aesop’s main hope was that the
creature would kill Bloc himself, and then he, Aesop, would be free for the
first time in his . . . death.

The wire fell away and he ducked through, moving swiftly out into the night.
Pushing into dingle he knocked away leeches that fell on him. He was dosed up
on a balm-soluble Intertox-Virex cocktail so it was unlikely the virus would
establish inside him, but he at least wanted to get through this retaining
some of his flesh. That was not because of any Cultist belief that true
resurrection could only come about through preserving intact the original
flesh. He just did not want to end up like Bones.

Neither he nor Bones had ever considered the remaining dregs of the Cult
anything more than a bunch of idiot fanatics the time they had gone to collect
on a contract put out on Taylor Bloc, then a Klader scientist studying alien
technologies. Bloc’s interest in reification had been only a hobby then, until
Aesop and Bones murdered him, when it became a total obsession. It was a
killing they of course wished they had never carried out, especially when the
reified Bloc pursued and then killed them. Awaking thereafter to reification
had come as a surprise. It became a nasty surprise when they discovered Prador
thralls had been connected in to their memcrystals, and that they were now
Bloc’s slaves.

* * * *

In the shallows surrounding the island the giant whelk encompassed bitter loss
and it was an organic pain, so she ignored the presence of the ship directly
above her. Stirring silt she picked up pieces of cleaned-out whelk shell, and
one by one stacked them on the skirt of flesh within the embrace of two
tentacles. She tasted the strong aromatics of turbul in the water and the
scales of those creatures still glittered in the silt, but there was no
recourse: this shoal was already gone, since no turbul would voluntarily come
anywhere near her, and she was not fast enough to catch even one of the
creatures.

After a time she had gathered every last piece of shell, and closed her fleshy
skirt around them like a large sack. Her impulse to protect was still there,
and anger grew in slow waves in some lobes of the fibre-bound organ that was
her brain. She turned an eye-stalk to watch an anchor being hauled up from the
bottom, snaked out a tentacle, and knocked it against the familiar object, but
could not summon up the inclination to find out what might happen if she
pulled. She vaguely recollected another instance like this, long in the past,
when the result had been . . . No, the memory was gone again. Whelkus
titanicus began dragging herself to the shore.

As she emerged from the sea the whelk’s anger took on a sharper edge. If only
... if only . . . Abruptly the supply of oxygenated ichor flooded to one of
the dormant brain lobes. If only she had not gone ashore after that other . .
. thing that had killed one of her young, then when she came after it, managed
to abandon its one shell and flee. It was all the fault of that one.

On the shore the whelk stacked the remains of her young where they would be
safe from the further attentions of the sea’s denizens. Then she turned an eye
towards the remains of that other’s shell, snaked out a tentacle and probed
the wreckage. There were new scents here, connected to the object earlier
floating above her. This puzzled her, as did the fact that there now seemed
less . . . small objects—things had been taken from this dwelling. Another
brain lobe abruptly fired up. The giant whelk turned her eyes to look back at
the sea. The ... ship ... was gone. She remembered then when she had once
hauled on an anchor chain and pulled down a large object made out of island
trees. Those who tumbled from it, and on whom she had fed, they were the
same—the same as that other!

She tasted and sensed the ground again, detected trails leading inland,
swivelled her eyes to look out to sea again, could not decide what to do, then
understood she had only the land trails to follow. Abruptly she surged
forwards, knocking over trees and following those trails to the lane she had
earlier cut across the island. From a high point, in darkness, she dimly
discerned the ship turning into the wind beyond the far shore. She hurtled
downslope, staying to her previous trail as on it she could move faster. Soon
she reached the tideline and paused. Then she surged on.

Throwing a huge wave before her the giant whelk slammed back down into the
sea. She remembered things so much more clearly now. The other had done this
and .. other... was in the vessel heading away from her. Licking her corkscrew

tongue through the water she detected the taste of them, and the vaguest hint
of the other from the island. Confusing memories arose: sounds with meanings
disconnected from their inherent meaning within the sea, objects fashioned
like shells but extraneous to the body, hints of understanding of things
beyond her watery home. But the ship, yes the ship, contained others like the
killer of her young, connected to that one by small objects taken from its
dwelling on the island.

And she would avenge.

* * * *

Janer jerked awake to the sound of explosions, glanced towards the window of
the bunk house he had been directed to the previous evening. He had quickly
realized that there were certain tensions here. Now it seemed they had come to
a head. He rolled off his bed, pulled on his trousers and slipped on his
envirosuit boots. As an afterthought he took up the skinstick box containing
two hornets and pressed it against the bare skin of his shoulder.

‘What the bugger is that?’ said a Hooper in one of the other bunks.

‘Shut yer gob, Loric.’

‘Let’s be taking a look at it then, lads,’ said the calm voice of Captain Ron.

‘Batian weapons? the hive mind informed Janer. ‘Perhaps you should not have
come here.’

‘No shit,’ said Janer, moving to the door.

He paused for a moment, glancing back at his belongings, but decided against
collecting one particular item from among them. Opening the door he peered
out.

The mercenary Shive ran across in front of him, two comrades dogging his
footsteps. They reached a storehouse, quickly opened its door and darted
inside.

‘Big leech?’ Janer wondered.

The hive mind just buzzed at him.

He stepped out as the Hoopers bestirred themselves behind him, and turned
towards the staccato crackling of projectile weapons. A group of six Batians
were firing at something between units. Something large.

‘Big leech,’ he confirmed, and began walking in that direction to watch the
show. He did not suppose it would be a long one, since the weapons the
mercenaries carried would make short work of the soft-bodied creature, no
matter how large it was. He was ten metres from his unit when a group of
reifications ran past him with that off-balance gait they assumed when trying
to move fast. Something rose up into the night from further over in the
enclosure. Large and spoon-shaped, it turned and he glimpsed two vertical rows
of glowing red points. Weapons fire began to impact on it, lighting it up. He
glimpsed armoured segments, saw that the weapons were having no effect. Then a
missile streaked in from the side and exploded against the creature, which
dropped out of sight.

‘That is not a leech,’ said the hive mind. ‘I suggest you hide.’

Janer glanced round. The missile had been fired by Shive or one of his two
comrades, who were all now carrying missile launchers. After that initial shot
they disappeared off between buildings to the left. The other visible group of
mercenaries also headed on out of sight.

‘You know I’m not the kind to hide,’ muttered Janer, moving after them.

‘That creature is a hooder.’

Janer paused, having heard of such things. They were no natives of this world,
and where they came from they were implanted with locators so people could
know when to run. Very tough and difficult to kill, apparently. Janer at once
wanted to take a closer look at it. As he advanced, however, something else
gave him pause. Bloc’s Kladites—either troops or worshippers, Janer was not
sure—had appeared from behind the storehouse. Some of them now entered it and
began dragging out heavy crates for others of their number to take away. More
weapons, he assumed. Janer moved on.

Around the corner two Batians were firing repeatedly at the glistening side of
the hooder as it hammered between the buildings, lit up with multiple

concussions. Janer saw it bow under the impact of them. One of the buildings
crashed over, still intact, at an angle, and that nightmare cowled head swung
into clear view. The creature paused, its cowl swivelling like a searchlight.
Janer took cover behind a stack of plasmel barrels. Something caught his eye
and he looked down. Bones. Stripped of flesh but bloody. A head, one side of
it stripped clean. Pieces of crabskin armour. Janer ignored the weapon that
lay there—it had not done its owner much good.

The hooder came on over the tilted building and swerved towards the two
marksmen. Someone else launched a missile, blowing its front end up off the
ground, but still it came on, up over one of the mercenaries, then hard down
on him even as he fired up into its hot eyes and surgical cutlery. It reared
again, scattering human detritus, then swung sideways, chopping the other man
in half with its cowl edge. Janer abruptly realized that no one was firing at
it from this side of the enclosure. He moved further back into the shadows and
glanced at the gore-bespattered weapon lying in the dust. Fortunately the
hooder had turned towards the firing coming from behind it.

‘Now would be a good time to hide,’ the hive mind suggested.

Janer ran from cover, following the creature. In a narrow alley between
accommodation units he noted the rips in the nearby walls caused by the
passage of hard-edged carapace. Further along it had obviously caught a number
of mercenaries, their number Janer could only guess by counting heads.
Probably five or six? It was a gory mess, and blood-soaked dust caked his
boots as he moved on.

In the clear central area of the enclosure the hooder was swinging around in
an arc. Two mercenaries were crouched behind some crates nearby, tending to
one of their fellows on the ground. Janer ran over and saw it was Shive. He
was coughing blood while his comrades slapped drug patches on him and hooked
an oxygenator into his jugular. The two glanced up at Janer and continued
working. He supposed they preferred doing this than being out there in the
beast’s path.

‘The Kladites are arming themselves,’ Janer said, testingly.

Shive just exposed bloody teeth then turned his head for the device to be
attached to his neck. Returning his attention to the monster, Janer saw it
rear up over a small group of Hoopers.

‘Oh shit. . . Ron!’ Janer stood upright.

The Old Captain stood at the fore, directly facing the hooder, a huge machete

held ready to deliver a blow. The hooder came down on him hesitantly, as if it
thought there might be some danger here. The Captain struck it hard with his
machete, unbelievably hard, for the blade dug well into shell the Batian
missiles had only pocked. The monster jerked back, pulling the blade from the
Captain’s grasp. The Hoopers behind him began retreating. Perhaps realizing he
might have been a tad overconfident, the Old Captain also retreated, but the
hooder came down on him like a cat’s paw.

Janer began running towards the Captain, not knowing what he intended but
knowing he must do something. Then the cowl lifted up, higher and higher, Ron
heaving himself upright, Herculean, but it slammed down yet again. Then fire
ignited the night: a ragged beam of violet energy struck the hooder centrally.
Janer went down feeling heat on his face and along one side of his body. For a
moment the hooder’s tough carapace resisted the energy directed at it, then it
burned like straw in an acetylene flame. Whoever was directing the weapon
brought his aim back across, going for the monster’s head, but already the
front ten-metre section of the hooder was coiling up and away. It crashed
against a house, slid up over it and down the other side. Two more blasts,
focusing on the still-thrashing tail of the monster, and two body segments
flamed before the fire shut off.

Stillness now, but for the thrashing of what was left of the beast’s tail. A
fog of smoke rolled across the enclosure, and sticky black strands fell
through the air. People began calling to each other. Someone was groaning. To
one side a reification, missing the lower half of his body, was dragging
himself out of a crushed accommodation unit. Janer stood and observed Kladites
armed with laser carbines coming in to surround the severed tail, which was
now jerking just occasionally.

‘Ah, the reinforcements have arrived,’ said Janer sarcastically.

‘But for which side?’ the hive mind wondered.

Janer broke into a trot, heading for where a figure was lying prone. After a
moment the man moved, then with a curse heaved himself upright. The skin of
his arm had been stripped down, like a sleeve torn off at the shoulder, and
was concertinaed around his wrist. He pulled it up again and patted it into
place, then frowned at the rips in his clothing. The holes sliced into his
body were now visibly closing. There was no blood on him. None at all.

‘Now that was a nasty bugger,’ growled Captain Ron.
* * * *

6

Land Leech:
from a large encystment clinging to the bottom of a clump of sargassum,
protected in sprine-laden jelly poisonous to predators, leeches hatch out as
globular diatoms with extended plug-cutting mouths already working. They drift
in the sea, feeding and growing—forming the largest proportion of what is
referred to as Spatterjay’s ‘vicious plankton’. However, they do not have it
all their own way, being fed upon by anything large enough to eat them and
small enough to gain any benefit from the meal—including their own kind. When
they reach the size of a pea, they become somnolent, and it is at this stage
the predation upon them is at its greatest. It is estimated that less than one
in a million are finally washed ashore. Exposed to higher oxygen levels on the
beach, they use stored fat to transform into fingerling leeches, and crawl
inland to find a peartrunk tree in which to roost. A symbiotic relationship
exists here. When heirodonts strip tree bark from it, the tree shakes,
dropping leeches on the grazer to drive it away. But that relationship is
simple compared to the relationship between leeches and the Spatterjay virus.

In prey infected by leech bite, the virus imparts resistance to damage and
disease, and huge powers of regeneration. However, the regenerative process
uses both the leech genome and fragments of other animal genomes which the
virus has acquired over a billion years of evolution. Severely damaged animals
can transform entirely into leeches — and other things.

The mechanism that finally drives leeches back into the ocean is dependent on
land food resources and the island leech population. They can enter the sea at
any size from that of a human arm up to something weighing many tons. Some
never enter the sea, moving inland to deep dingle—becoming tougher-skinned,
more tubular and of a reddish colour—where they feed upon larger varieties of
land heirodont -

Captain Orbus was peeved that no one had been in a hurry to join his ship,
that in fact three crewmen had abandoned it. Yes, his mate had been murdered
and two of the crew executed for the crime, but new recruits would not be in
any danger, and anyway Hoopers should not be so choosy or so cowardly. He
guessed that what put them off was the atmosphere of despondency and
bitterness aboard the Vignette, a mood that had better soon disperse or he
would want to know the reason why. Even the sail, which had joined them with
no knowledge of the events back on Chel, was beginning to get uneasy. Good
thing sails now worked under contract. Without that piece of paper, this one
would have abandoned them long before.

As he reclined in his chair on the Captain’s bridge, enjoying the hot morning
sun and gazing out across pale green ocean, Orbus knew this was not going to
be a particularly enjoyable journey, nor a profitable one. He discounted at
once any thoughts of going after sprine. Being short-handed would push such a

dangerous venture over the edge into lethality. Orbus did not mind losing the
odd man when he had them to spare, but now he did not. It seemed his only
option was to do a bit of turbul fishing, if the opportunity arose, on the way
to find the particular variety of sargassum that had been the downfall of his
mate. Collecting squeaky weed would be the only way to turn a profit, again.
And perhaps this time he would not have to push his crew so hard. He would
take it easy on them. There would be no keel-hauling on this journey, no
thrashings . . . Yes, he would take it easy. He eyed the desultory way his
crew now went about their tasks. At least, no punishments unless they were
called for. He heaved himself out of his chair and stood.

‘Lannias, have you greased the ratchets?’ he demanded loudly.

‘Yes, Cap’n.’

‘Drooble, isn’t it time you stowed those ropes?’

‘Yeah, probably,’ Drooble replied, leering up at Orbus.

‘Do you want to be the first strapped up against the mast, Drooble?’ Orbus
asked.

Still leering up at him, Drooble licked his lips. Abruptly Orbus felt a sudden
disquiet. The other Old Captains, though agreeing there could be only one
punishment for murder by sprine, had been scathing of his abilities. What was
it Captain Drum had said?

‘Your crew can leave you at any time, Orbus, and being the bastard you are, do
you ever wonder why any of them stay?’

‘I am a strict man and Hoopers need the discipline,’ Orbus had protested.

‘More like,’ Drum opined, ‘they like the discipline.’

Orbus was aware that in the eyes of the other Captains he was too strict and
too ready with the punishments, and his crew too ready to receive them.

‘Get on with you,’ he said to Drooble, and turned away.

It was then that the sail’s head snapped up to peer at something casting a
shadow on the deck. Orbus looked up into sun-reflected glare. For a moment the
experience was religious—he felt on the brink of some revelation—then a voice
said, ‘Okay, Captain, I’ve distance scanned you, but our quarry might be using
chameleonware. I’d like to search your ship.’

Orbus blinked, and his vision finally resolved the huge gleaming nautiloid
drone descending beside the Vignette. There were other shapes higher up he
could not discern, and to the right of the big drone was a small iron-coloured
one bearing the shape of a scallop, and another fashioned like some mythical
fish swimming through the air, its large scales glinting metallic green.

‘The Polity has no jurisdiction here,’ said Orbus, still angry because of his
previous feelings. ‘Any of you try to enter my ship and you will know the
cost. Now bugger off!’

Orbus had not seen this particular drone before, but the others of the
Warden’s drones, he recollected, usually went away if you shouted at them
loudly enough. They were all frightened of stepping outside of the complicated
charter laid down for them by Earth Central, and they all tried to keep out of
trouble that could result in them being subsumed back into the Warden. There
had apparently been some changes a number of years back, but Orbus had not
been interested enough to find out what they were.

‘Are you threatening me?’ asked the big drone.

The fish drone piped up, ‘Bad move, Captain.’

The scallop added, ‘A possibly injurious move.’

Orbus glanced aside and saw that all the remaining twelve members of his crew
were out on deck. It seemed it was now a matter of keeping face. He reached
over by his chair and picked up the weapon propped there. It had cost him a
shipload of squeaky weed to buy this. He flicked a switch on the side of it
and the gas-system pulse rifle whined up to charge. As an afterthought he then
picked up the glittering coil of his flexal bullwhip. The big drone, he
expected he could only drive away, but if he could get a coil of his whip
around one of the little shits and pull it close, he knew, with his Old
Captain strength, he would be able to tear it apart. He stood silently
waiting. In a minute they would decide he was too much trouble and be on their
way. And, after that happened, he would go down to the lower deck and wipe
that smirk off Drooble’s face.

The big drone sighed theatrically. ‘You know, while I was the Warden I had
access to all the files on the Old Captains and now carry copies of them
inside myself. Yours makes interesting reading: a sadist in charge of a crew
of masochists. Now my view has always been one of “Live and let live”,’ the
big drone paused for a second after a snort issued from the scallop, and Orbus
guessed at some quick unheard communication, ‘but what about those Hoopers who
joined you out of foolishness or desperation? As far back as your file goes,
you’ve had six murders and four suicides aboard your ship, and eight others
missing without explanation.’ The drone shrugged in mid-air. ‘What do you say
to that?’

‘I say bugger off,’ said Orbus. He flipped his whip out behind him and
levelled his pulse rifle.

‘Oh sod this,’ said the drone.

Orbus fired. A gleaming tentacle slid out from the drone with deceptive speed.
The shots from the rifle just puffed into nacreous clouds on the drone’s skin,
as the tentacle wrapped around the Old Captain’s neck and hauled him into the
air. Other tentacles sped in, and he felt his whip and rifle snatched from his
grasp, then he was upside down, a tentacle around his ankles, being jerked
through the air. Next thing he knew he was hanging upside down from a spar of
the foremast. He peered up at his ankles and saw them bound to the pearwood
with his own whip.

‘Search it,’ said the big drone.

The two other drones zipped down to the deck and hovered over the forward
hatch. Drooble ran over to them, stared at them for a moment, then reached
down to open it.

‘Leave that bloody hatch alone!’ Orbus bellowed.

Drooble leered, then dragged it open. The drones shot inside.

‘Let me down from here!’ Orbus yelled, not liking the way his crew were now
grinning up at him. He hauled himself up and tried to undo the whip, but not
only had it been knotted around his ankles, the flexal coils had been welded.
He dropped back down, to look into the upside-down crocodilian face of the
sail.

‘Dumb,’ it said. ‘Surprisingly dumb.’

Shortly the small drones came back out of the hatch.

‘Clean as clean can be,’ prattled the fish.

‘Not a Golem in sight,’ added the scallop.

And with a low roar all three of them ascended into the sky.

‘Get me down from here!’ Orbus yelled again.

‘Minute, Cap’n. I got that rope to stow,’ said Drooble.

‘I think I missed one of the ratchets,’ said Lannias.

Other crewmembers took their lead from those two, and set about their many
assigned tasks. All ignored the Captain’s bellowing for the best part of the
day. When they finally decided to cut him down, they cut through the spar—it
was the only way—and Orbus fell headfirst to the deck. He was very angry when
he finally managed to free his ankles. Most of them liked that. Others were
terrified.

* * * *

There were traps upon traps layered into the programming, their parameters
changing over seemingly random time periods. There were so many that Vrell
wondered how his father had kept track of them all and not fallen foul of them
himself. Like the blast doors Vrell had earlier opened, and jammed by fusing
the motors that drove them. For them the input locking codes changed at
periods ranging from a few minutes to entire days. But at least this control
pit and its array of screens in Father’s sanctum continued operating once
Vrell short-circuited the gene reader with a lump of gristle he’d found
attached to a piece of his father’s carapace.

With increasing bewilderment Vrell worked his way through the programming
systems of the ship. He was finding the traps and nullifying them, but knew

that at this rate he would not clean the system until some years hence. It
made his major ganglion ache and, as he worked, pressure grew inside him.
Inevitably there came a dull crunch, and he turned his eye-palps, and what was
now his head, to observe another crack in his carapace. Relief was immediate,
and with it came sudden inspiration. Of course, there had to be a separate
tracking and reformatting program. It was clearly not in the system itself, so
Father must have accessed it through one of his control units—one that was
still active. And it was even more obvious that his father used the same unit
to access the whole system. How could Ebulan have done otherwise? He had no
hands. It was so blatantly obvious, why had Vrell not seen this before?

Vrell spun round and clattered across the room picking up the hexagonal
control units once welded to his father’s carapace. Using a remote reader, a
second device that mated into the socket in the face of each unit, he tested
each one in turn. The first three were dead—obviously linked to the thrall
units rendered defunct by the destruction of the blanks they ran—but the
fourth was still transmitting. The Prador took it over to Ebulan’s private
storage area—now open—went inside, unplugged the reader, then plugged a cable
from a diagnostic tester into the same socket. All the control unit required,
apparently, was another nanofibre rooting module. He found one of these,
removed the old module from the back of the unit, and plugged the new one into
place. With another hand he picked up a multihead carapace drill, placed it
against his underside and triggered it. A high whine and puff of powder
resulted in a neat pepperpot of holes in his undercarapace. He brought the
unit up to these and paused.

There was danger here from two sources: the rooting module carried the format
for Prador physiology, and Vrell was not exactly a normal Prador any more; and
there might be more traps. He thought the latter possibility remote. The traps
were all outside this chamber, since Ebulan had not expected an enemy to get
this close, which was why, in the end, he was now in pieces on the floor.
Vrell pushed the control unit into place, felt the sudden heat as it
shell-welded, took his hand away.

Nothing for a moment, then a nauseating sensation much like he had experienced
when the leeches burrowed inside his carapace. Then slowly, inexorably, he saw
with other eyes and reached out with invisible hands into the systems of the
ship. Programming within the unit itself automatically corrected his course so
he did not fall afoul of the traps, physical or otherwise. Slowly he began to
encompass it all. He saw the blown reactors and burnt-out generators both
through cameras and in the constant cycling of diagnostic programs. He knew
that, with a great deal of work, some fusion reactors were salvageable.
Weapons systems were no problem: most of them were functional though lacking
in sufficient power or projectiles. He set a small autofactory to suck in sea
water and electrolyse required chemicals. Metals in storage were also made
available to the factory, and within an hour the first gleaming missiles were
clicking into place in weapons carousels. He cleared other glitches,
circumvented damage, brought online and gave autonomy to repair systems that
Ebulan, in his paranoia, had controlled centrally. Eventually he reached a
point where there was no more he could do through the ship’s computer systems.
It was time for grunt work. Shaking himself, Vrell pulled out from that
omniscient ship vision and gazed around. From a nearby rack he took out four
control units, and four thrall units, together with the required equipment for
their installation. Then he headed for the ship’s larder—more than one purpose

in mind.

* * * *

Some of his Kladites had fetched an autohandler up from the construction site.
Peering out of the window, Bloc watched it trundle on its treads up to the
abandoned tail section of the hooder, open and swivel its pincer grabs to pick
the thing up. The tail was still moving and, from what he knew of hooder
biology, each of its segments could grow into a new creature. He had no wish
for any more of the creatures in this vicinity so had ordered it taken away
and burned outside the enclosure. Others meanwhile were collecting human
remains in motorized barrows, and still another group was pulling one of the
accommodation units upright with a winch. Bloc turned away from the window.

‘Who fired that antiphoton weapon?’ he asked.

‘I’ve no idea who fired that proton weapon,’ Shive replied pedantically. ‘But,
then, what lunatic brought a hooder here and released it?’

Bloc studied him. Shive could stand upright, though a little unsteadily. Two
of his five remaining comrades were not so lucky. Both were on AG stretchers,
one with his leg terminating at the knee, and one with a chrome autodoc
clinging to her side maintaining life in her badly shattered body until such
time as she could receive better attention than would be provided here. It had
not been difficult to disarm them in the aftermath of the attack. Eighty
Kladites armed with laser carbines had been sufficient.

‘Why, you did, Shive,’ said Bloc.

The mercenary bared his teeth. He was not so impressive now without his armour
or his guns.

‘You think anyone is going to believe that?’

Bones took a step towards the mercenary, but Bloc reined him back. There was
no need for any violence now Bloc had won. He glanced to the Kladite guards
standing around the walls of the storeroom. They were completely loyal.

‘The passengers will believe. Apparently Lineworld Developments had the
creature shipped here in order to sufficiently damage this enterprise to push

its start-up costs over a certain limit, whereupon they would be able to take
full control. Just like when they relocated us. In fact, the relocation was
the first part of the plan, and the hooder the next part. Everyone knows how
Lineworld operates.’

‘Reifications were destroyed by that creature, but many more of my men died.’

‘Oh yes ... I didn’t say it was a very good plan.’

‘So what now?’ Shive asked.

‘When the shuttle comes to take away the construction crew, you and your
comrades will be put on it. Surprisingly few reifs will be departing, despite
what happened here. Fewer still when I have had a chance to speak to them. You
will go back to your masters at Lineworld and tell them that they will not be
taking over this enterprise after all. They will not be able to do anything
about that, because by then the ship will be built.’

‘Do you think they’ll just accept that?’

‘What can they do? They can send more of your kind, but how will you take a
ship at sea? Remember, AG transport is not allowed on this planet, nor are
powered boats. And even if you should reach the ship, under sail, it will be
well protected.’

‘We have been well trained in taking such objectives.’

‘But you will also tell your masters that I still consider our contract valid.
Their initial investment will be repaid, and they will make a profit from the
first voyage, and subsequent voyages. I think they’ll find that the cost of
mounting an operation against me will far outweigh such profits, especially
when you tell them that should any operation be mounted against me, their
initial investment will end up at the bottom of the ocean.’

‘Bloc,’ Shive almost snarled, ‘I don’t care what Lineworld does. I’ll be
back.’

That was enough indication to Bloc of how Shive’s masters would ultimately
react: they were all about profit, not pride. He stared at the mercenary, his
spectacle irrigator spraying a fine mist into his eye. Why should he tolerate

such threats from a messenger? There were others here who could do the same
job.

‘Bones,’ he said, and mentally let that individual off the leash.

Bones stooped, then came upright fast. Secondary orders brought the Kladite
guards in, with weapons aimed. Shive grunted, staggered back, a small cylinder
of wood protruding from his right eye. The Kladites now covered the other
mercenaries; the stubby snouts of their laser carbines under chins, against
heads. Bones leapt forward and brought their leader down and, sitting on his
chest, grabbed the wooden handle, turned it with a wet crunching, then in a
gush of blood pulled out the ten-centimetre ceramocarbide blade.

Bloc studied the other mercenaries. ‘You’ll deliver my message?’

After a pause one of them said, ‘We’ll deliver it.’

‘Then make yourselves comfortable—you’ll be here for some little while yet.’
Bloc headed for the door, Bones following him, wiping his knife on his sleeve
before returning it to his boot sheath.

Outside, in bright sunshine, Bloc spotted Aesop walking towards him. He
stopped and waited until Aesop was close, then asked, ‘Where were you?’

Aesop seemed reluctant to reply until Bloc accessed him through his thrall
unit and applied pressure.

‘Outside the compound,’ Aesop explained.

‘And why were you out there?’

‘It seemed the safest place for me to be, considering I was soaked with that
pheromone.’

‘Did I give you permission to go?’

‘No, you didn’t, nor did you deny it.’

Bloc stared at Aesop, moisture again filling his dead eyes from his spectacle
irrigator. Aesop and Bones were becoming increasingly rebellious. Had that
occurred only recently, Bloc would have put it down to the extra channel he
had enabled through his control unit—meaning that his attention was more
divided—but it had been going on for a long time now. Perhaps, though they
could not physically reject their thrall units, as could Hooper humans, they
were somehow mentally rejecting them? He must check their hardware and run
some deep diagnostic tests on the software. He did not want to have to shut
them down, as they had been such useful tools—comfortable as well-worn shoes.

‘Very well,’ said Bloc. ‘Our Batian friends are well guarded now, but I want
you and Bones to find out who fired that APW.’ He gestured to Bones who stood
right beside him, head tilted staring at something on the ground.

‘How many Batians did it kill?’ Aesop asked.

‘The weapon?’

‘No, the hooder.’

‘Twelve of them.’

‘Other casualties?’

Bloc closed the one eye he was still able to close and disconnected visual
reception from the other. He then turned an inner eye to the control unit
inside his skull, and to one of its three open channels. Aesop was resisting
the order he had been given and pursuing a frankly irritating line of
questioning. Bloc did not want to talk about the eight reification memcrystals
now being packed into a box for shipment back to Klader, nor the reports he
had heard of some scatterings of heavy, slightly distorted bones, which meant
the creature had also killed Hoopers. He increased the signal strength from
the unit down the channels connecting to both Aesop and Bones.

‘Obey my orders,’ he said tersely, and opened his one lidded eye.

Aesop nodded and turned, while Bones jerked his head up again and followed his
partner. Closing his eye again, Bloc focused his attention through the unit on

something else, something wild and red and dangerous. He tried to exert his
will over that entity, tried to—

WARN: EXTREMITY PROBE LA76 REG. CELLULAR DAMAGE

What?

Bloc fully restored his own vision, and for a moment could not fathom what the
message might mean. Was it another glitch? Some ghost signal coming back
through the control unit?

LA 76?

Leg/ankle, he realized, and looked down.

The leech was not large: merely the size and shape of a cucumber. He realized
now that this was what Bones had been staring at, probably even as it
slithered across the ground towards Bloc’s ankle. He stepped on it with his
other foot and pulled his ankle away from it. The creature stretched to almost
twice its own length then snapped back to normal size, a lump of grey flesh
disappearing into its pink tubular mouth. Bloc put his full weight on it and
twisted his foot back and forth until it burst like a huge blackcurrant, then
finally stepped away. He tried to remember when last he had updated his dose
of Intertox. The new formula lasted longer in reification balms than the stuff
Sable Keech had used, but it did need to be frequently renewed.

WARN: CELLULAR REPAIR REQ. SHUTTING BALM FLOW LA76

OUTPARAFUNCT: YABB@~*

MEMSPACE: 00048

Ignoring the corrupted messages, Bloc glanced down by his ankle and saw balm
soaking into the dusty soil. He needed to seal that quickly, then he needed to
make sure the fence was back up, and the compound scoured of native life
forms. He hurried to his quarters. He also needed to update his Intertox dose.
He was a long way from the Little Flint and the transformation that awaited
him there. To be infected by the Spatterjay virus now could be catastrophic.

* * * *

Only two of the four human bodies were serviceable. The nervous systems of the
others being so badly degraded by their transformation into the leech form,
Vrell was unable to use them, so ate them instead. Now, with two extra control
units bonded to his carapace, he constantly updated the programming of the
remaining two so that they worked as an adjunct to his mind, two extra pairs
of hands as was intended. Glimpsing them through ship’s eyes, he watched one
of them clearing wreckage and feeding it into one of the multi-furnaces Vrell
had earlier ignited, while the other welded cracked bulkheads. Of course, in
their earlier state with only leech mouths growing between their shoulders
where their heads should have been, they had been of little use. It was only
when he connected two cameras into the thrall units of each to give them
binocular vision that he managed to utilize them. Now they looked like humans
with strange trunklike probosces and insectile eyes rearing up on stalks. Even
so, they were not enough.

Vrell checked the reading on his mission timer. Much time had been counted
away by the slowly changing glyphs. He had accomplished much, but there was
still very much to do. He needed to work faster than this, else he would run
out of food long before he was ready.

It had puzzled him why Ebulan, knowing the dangers, had used only a spider
thrall on an Old Captain called Drum, rather than fully core the man. Now he
knew. Full coring removed every last trace of the original inhabiting
intelligence, but most importantly it removed that part of the intelligence
best described as ‘know thyself’. To control fully cored humans, like the two
below, required a great deal of practice, for the controlled body did not
instinctively know simple things like the length of its arms, how far a single
pace would take it, or how tightly to grip an object to hold it, and so on.
They also did not sense or react to pain. Consequently it had taken Vrell a
long time to learn how to control these two, and still they were clumsy and
constantly damaging themselves.

Once again fully connected into the ship’s system, Vrell searched for other
tools to employ. He found a few small quadruped robots, whose purpose was to
act as landward spies, and used them to clean up loose contaminants where a
ceramic pile had fragmented. There were few other machines in the ship like
them, and Vrell cursed the paranoia that had for so long prevented Prador
using AI and other self-governing machines. Then, remembering his entry into
the ship, he turned his attention to the drone cache and found there one of
his kin.

‘We will kill the old drone,’ came the comment from the flash-frozen and
stored brain of a Prador adolescent—still cycling some previous instruction
from Ebulan.

Vrell studied diagnostic returns and peered through sonar cameras in the
cache. Ebulan had used the brain as a backup recorder for the mobile war
drones, so new drones would benefit from the experiences of their
predecessors. The brain was stored behind the armoured bulkhead and had been
disconnected from its group, probably so no signals could be traced back to
the ship itself. Vrell felt his curiosity stirring: what was this old drone it
wanted to kill? And, most importantly, what had obliterated the rest of the
drones? Could it be the same thing that had brought down the ship itself?

Vrell tried to ascertain as much as possible from the ship’s memory, but there
were gaping holes caused by feedback damage, and holes he himself had
necessarily made to excise the alien programs remaining in the system from
when the Warden had turned Ebulan’s own blanks against him. All he knew for
certain was that, while Father had been distracted by this takeover, something
had punched through the ship. He keyed into the control drone’s memory and
found part of the puzzle. He observed how, one after another, Ebulan’s drones
had been duped and destroyed by an ancient ECS war drone.

‘Father,’ said the drone mind.

Vrell ignored it. The adolescent brain presently had no way of knowing, being
controlled now by the ship’s systems rather than Ebulan’s pheromones, that it
was not the old Prador currently plumbing its memories. Vrell was still
curious about what had hit this ship. His survival might depend on knowing
that. There was a risk involved in what he decided to do next, but not too
serious. Checking system memory, he knew that there were still some of
Father’s secondary emitters out in the ocean, and many of them would have
stored the last memory downloads from the remaining drones. He laboriously
began to decode program traps so he could reinstate outside connections. When
that was completed, some days later, the U-space links established in
microseconds, and within further microseconds memory returned to the backup
brain.

‘Not Father,’ said the adolescent, now knowing Ebulan was dead, before Vrell
finished assessing those memories.

Vrell saw the last of the war drones, gutted by the ECS drone but still
transmitting, taken high and brought down hard, along with that old ECS drone,
to punch through Ebulan’s ship. The blow had been as simple and effective as
that. In a way that was a relief, for Vrell had feared some powerful weapons
strike from the Warden itself.

‘You are not Father,’ said the adolescent.

‘Obey me,’ said Vrell, reinforcing the order through the ship’s systems.

‘We will kill the old drone.’

As he isolated the brain from the secondary emitters, Vrell thought not. The
other drones had not managed the task, and anyway the old drone had destroyed
itself in that last attack. Thinking very clearly, Vrell realized what the
problem had been: not the weaponry or armour but the minds behind them. That
wily old ECS drone had been utterly out-gunned yet won every skirmish. Vrell
himself could see how the Prador drones had been far too direct, and blind to
the diversity of the ECS drone’s attacks. Knowing what he knew now, Vrell
would have been more circumspect, and that was why he opened up a programming
link, began to rearrange his sibling’s brain, and to map memories and thought
structures across. When he had completed that task, he disconnected the
adolescent brain from the ship and opened the bulkhead that protected it. Then
he started pumps emptying the cache of sea water, before going in search of
the tools he required.

* * * *

In a time unknown to him, ‘Vrell’ surfaced to awareness, clamped in the cache
of his father’s ship. He did an almost instinctive systems check, and
immediately discovered his non-standard alterations: extra grav-units, double
the thickness of armour and double the power supply, additional Polity tech
usually treated with contempt by the Prador, and even claws. He turned an
eye-pit towards the other drone shell, and saw that it had been cannibalized
to supply him with some of these additions, though the claws themselves were
utterly new. He was much more powerful than any other drone ever launched from
this ship, but this did nothing to stem the tide of bitter anger that filled
him, knowing he was a copy of the original Vrell mapped into the mind of a
flash-frozen sibling. And he was unable to disobey the real Vrell, who had
long ago returned to Ebulan’s sanctum.

* * * *

In the gloom of the Treader’s hold, Ambel studied the ship’s manifest on his
palm-screen. Then he eyed the crates of bottles filled with Intertox-laced
fruit juice, the garlic bulbs and onions hanging in nets, the packs of
desiccated proteins and vegetables, the salted pigs and various other items of
dome-grown food. At a bit of a stretch there was enough here to keep himself
and the crew from going native throughout the long journey he planned. Just
one of those bottles of juice could keep the change at bay for the best part
of a week. However, there was not enough food overall. He listened to the
noise up on deck, which told him they were ready up there, then turned off the
screen and headed for the ladder.

Climbing up onto the bridge of the Treader, Ambel turned and surveyed his
crew. As instructed, all of them were now up on deck, some of them looking

tired and irritable after being woken while off their shift. There were only
four seniors: Peck, Anne, and now Sild on the deck below, and Boris at the
helm beside Ambel. Of the junior crewmen there were eight, Sprout being the
most senior. Fourteen mouths to feed, including the sail.

‘Listen up, lads,’ Ambel called, and, once he was sure he had their attention,
continued. ‘You all saw the island and think you know what happened there. You
don’t, and neither do I really. Erlin is still alive.’ He allowed them to
mutter amongst themselves and toss dubious glances at each other. ‘I know this
quite simply because she was spotted being carried away from the island by
that big Golem sail, Zephyr, and his two companions.’

‘So she’s safe?’ said Anne delightedly.

Standing next to Ambel, Boris was rolling the end of his moustache between his
fingertips, but even he could not remain dour at such news, and began smiling.
Even Peck was showing his teeth, though whether or not he was grinning was
debatable. Sild also looked happy. Other crew members, knowing Erlin less well
and not having shared in this ship’s history, showed varying degrees of
happiness or scepticism.

Ambel winced. ‘I’m not so sure about her being safe. The sail is heading due
east, and the only habitation that way is what has recently been named
Mortuary Island—where reifications are building a big ship called the Sable
Keech.’

‘Why would she want to go there?’ asked Anne.

‘I’m not so sure she does want
communicated her intention, if
learnt that one Taylor Bloc, a
his followers what she did for

to go there,’ said Ambel, ‘as she would have
not to me, then at least to the Warden. I’ve
reif, wants her there so she can do for him and
Sable Keech himself.’

‘The sails kidnapped her?’ said Boris.

At this one of the juniors spat, ‘Bloody sails.’

Ambel eyed the man, a one-fifty Hooper called Pillow—which was a comfortable
name for a man who had taken to discomfort in a big way, by the look of his
various body piercings. Ambel was about to utter some sort of reprimand when
he saw Galegrabber’s head swing over the crowd, on the end of its long
muscular neck, and dip down until it was breathing in Pillow’s ear.

‘You got a problem with sails, junior?’ hissed the sail.

Pillow nervously revolved his nose stud between forefinger and thumb. ‘Nooo,
no problem.’

‘Good.’ Galegrabber rose up and turned back towards Ambel.

‘Now,’ said Ambel, ‘I could ask for help from the Warden, but I’ve always felt
we should settle our own problems. I intend now to sail to this Mortuary
Island and rescue Erlin.’

‘That’s a bloody long way,’ someone muttered incredulously.

Ambel went on relentlessly, ‘We’ll detour to the Sargassum first, picking up
some turbul and amberclams on the way to supplement our supplies. I’m told
there’s at least seven ships in that area, so any of you who don’t fancy the
journey can hitch a ride from there.’

As the crew began to disperse, Galegrabber stretched his neck even further and
brought his head level with Ambel on the bridge.

‘I got a contract,’ said the sail. ‘And this journey ain’t written down in
it.’

Ambel reached into his pocket and pulled out a wooden box.

‘The aug you’re wearing,’ said the Old Captain, ‘it’s the basic cheap datalink
kind. Bottom of the ladder really.’

‘So?’

Ambel opened the box and displayed the shiny new aug inside. ‘I thought about
fitting this to myself, but never got round to it. It’s an Orion 3000, top of
the range. From your present aug we can record across the alignment program
for sail physiology, and then it’ll be ready to attach. What do you say?’

The sail licked its lips with its bifurcated tongue. ‘I’ll want that in
writing.’

Ambel produced a new contract from his other pocket. ‘Just sign here.’

The sail took the paper from him in its soft lips and took it up to the top of
the mast to study. By the time it finished and signed the new
document—surprisingly remembering its new name—Ambel was down on the deck
organizing some fishing gear, for a shoal of turbul had just been sighted.

* * * *

The Hoopers, to make their bunkhouse distinct and for their own comfort,
constructed a veranda on which many of them would lounge during the day while
they grumbled about the cost of living here. Janer felt they did not really
have much to complain about: they were on a retainer until the Sable Keech
launched, at which point they would go onto a full crewman’s wages. Anyway, as
well as a veranda, they had also put together a couple of rafts to go fishing
for boxies and turbul in the nearby shallows, so all they needed to buy from
the various commercial concerns here was some Earth food, which was sensibly
sold to them fairly cheaply. Forlam, showing uncharacteristic enterprise, had
even brought along a still, and the distinctive smell around their bunkhouse
came from the numerous buckets ranged outside, all full to the brim with
fermenting seacane. Captain Ron thought Forlam a good lad.

‘He’s speaking again,’ Janer observed as he stepped out onto the veranda. He
blinked in the bright light, rubbed his aching head—too much of Forlam’s rum
last night.

‘Haranguing more like,’ rumbled Ron from where he sat in a chair tilted back
against the wall. ‘It don’t seem to be working.’ He sipped from a beaker of
coffee.

Bloc stood on a crate in the central clearing before a crowd of reifications.
Picking up the gist of what he was saying, Janer realized the reif leader was
telling them it was their duty to support him in defiance of Lineworld
Developments’ attempted rip-off.

‘Maybe that’s because the intended target of that rip-off was Bloc himself,’
said Janer.

‘I dare say,’ Ron replied.

The hive mind then chipped in, ‘I have been checking: Bloc now fully controls
this operation here, yet has maintained his contract with Lineworld. That
means no reduction in ticket prices, accommodation costs or reification
spares’

Janer relayed that to Ron. They had both heard plenty of grumbling, and knew
that when the shuttle finally returned over two hundred of the reifications
currently here would be leaving on it. But maybe that was not all down to
economics. There was still the front end of a hooder out there somewhere.

‘How are you now?’ Janer asked Ron.

His injury hunger—that ravenous appetite Hoopers experienced after any
physical damage as their bodies rebuilt themselves—had been immense, and had
required the other Hoopers to chip in funds to buy sufficient dome-grown food.

‘Right as rain.’ Ron patted his shoulder.

Janer took hold of a chair and sat astride it. He watched Bloc, the crowd, the
armed Kladites scattered all around the area.

‘Lineworld really screwed up, shipping that thing here,’ he said testingly.

Ron just grunted at that.

‘I note that no APW has turned up yet, and no one has admitted to owning one.
We still don’t know who it was that cut the hooder in half.’

‘Not for lack of effort on Bloc’s part,’ Ron observed. ‘His lieutenants ain’t
stopped turning this place over ever since.’

Janer nodded then emphatically wished he had not. He finally relented and took
some pills from the top pocket of his shirt to swallow dry.

‘You should not have drunk so much last night. You are not here on holiday,’
the hive mind informed him primly.

Janer squinted down at his shoulder. ‘I’m not sure I give a damn.’

Muttered imprecations issued from the hivelink. Janer returned his attention
to Captain Ron, who was gazing at him queryingly. ‘Hive minds are big on
temperance, probably because they don’t like what happens to their hornets
when they eat rotten fruit. You were saying .. .’

Ron shrugged and went on, ‘Curious how desperate Bloc is to find that weapon
and its owner, considering they saved so many lives.’

‘They’re all a bit odd here,’ said Janer.

‘Yes.’ Ron nodded. ‘Not normal folk like us.’

A snort issued from the hivelink. Janer stood up and stepped down from the
veranda, leaving Ron to nurse his coffee. Crossing the enclosure he eyed the
damage the alien beast had wrought and noted that most of it had already been
repaired. Most of the human remains had been collected, but it was still not
uncommon to step on something nasty concealed in the dust.

‘They were burning the dead last night,’ he observed. The pyre had been built
over the tail section of the hooder in an attempt to burn away some more of
that as well. Hooder flesh did not combust very easily. ‘I wonder what they’ll
do with the rest—the reifs are still extant, despite their bodies being ripped
apart.’

‘Their memcrystals will be sent to Klader. Possibly the reifs now lacking
bodies will be resurrected in Golem chassis or in cloned bodies, or destroyed,
depending on the strength of their beliefs.’

‘Destroyed?’

‘Yes. Fanatical cultists believed the body was all, no matter how decayed it
might be, and that without the body there can be no real return to life.
Though the Cult itself is now defunct, many reifs still ascribe to its

beliefs. Most here, incidentally, are Kladites.’

Janer grunted an acknowledgement then said, ‘I’m surprised.’

‘What, surprised at such primitive belief systems?’

‘No, that for three whole days you haven’t tried to persuade me to return to
Chel. Or, rather, I’m not so much surprised as rather certain there’s
something you aren’t telling me.’

‘Our agreement was for me to fund your journey here and to pay a bounty when
you performed certain tasks. I have other contacts on Chel who will keep me
apprised of anything I need to know. Meanwhile, I am curious about this . . .
situation.’

Janer winced. There were no facial or verbal cues from a hive mind, but he
knew it was lying. By now he had reached the edge of the compound, and saw
that a female Kladite guard stood at the gate, which seemed to Janer rather
redundant as over to her left a huge swathe of the fence was down.

‘Not advisable to go out there,’ said the woman.

Janer paused. He thought about arguing with her. But he was unarmed, being
reluctant to carry around the weapon he had brought, and was now remembering
how lethal Spatterjay life forms could be. And out there lurked something even
worse than hippo-sized leeches, prill or the occasional adventurous whelk. He
was not Captain Ron’s age, so the hooder could turn him into mush. He started
to turn away, when a voice spoke from behind him.

‘I’ll keep him out of trouble.’

Janer turned around fully. It was the Golem, Isis Wade.

‘Why should you manage any better out there than he would?’ the guard asked.

‘Bloc seems to think the hooder is some distance away now, and I’m sure, like
myself, Janer wants to see the ship.’ Wade shrugged. ‘Anyway, surely you are
here to protect Bloc’s interests, not the likes of us from our own stupidity?’

‘Well, it’s your life.’

The dead woman opened the gate and the two of them strolled through.

‘Now that’s interesting,’ said Janer, once they were some distance away from
her. ‘She doesn’t seem to know you’re Golem.’

‘Yes, it is,’ concurred Wade. ‘The Batians, if they had still been in charge
here, would have found that out soon enough. Bloc’s Kladites, however, are not
so well-equipped. Unfortunate that, isn’t it? It’s probably also why they
cannot find that APW.’

Janer grimaced. ‘Can you keep me out of trouble?’

‘I could pick you up and run a lot faster with you than the hooder can move.
Though I shouldn’t worry about that creature. It’ll be licking its wounds as
far away from here as it can get.’

‘You know about hooders then?’

‘I’ve travelled some,’ said Wade.

Janer nodded, let the conversation die for a moment, expecting the hive mind
to interject some comment. It remained ominously silent.

‘I never got to ask you,’ said Wade. He nodded at the transparent box affixed
to Janer’s shoulder. ‘As I understand it you’re no longer indentured, and
since certain events here a decade ago you haven’t carried a hive mind’s eyes.
So why now?’

Janer did not question how Wade had obtained this information—anyone with
access to the AI nets could know it. ‘Money,’ he explained smoothly. ‘After my
indenture I continued working for this hive mind. As you say, after the events
here, I broke the contract, but I’ve since renegotiated it.’

‘It was my understanding that you are now independently wealthy?’ said Wade.

‘You can never have too much,’ Janer replied. ‘The mind pays well for the
small inconvenience of carrying round a pack of hornets in stasis and a couple
of living ones on my shoulder, and all I have to do is be the tourist I’d pay
to be anyway.’

Wade did not reply to that; instead he pointed ahead to where one of the reifs
was trudging up the path towards them. ‘That’s Aesop—one of Taylor Bloc’s
lieutenants.’

They both halted and stepped aside as Aesop walked past them. Janer only knew
which reif this was because of the recognizable flak jacket he wore and
because Wade had identified him. This was the first time the reif’s features
had been visible. Aesop’s face was damaged—new damage—but that was nothing in
comparison to his old and all too obvious death-wound. A segment of his skull
between twelve and one o’clock was completely missing above his left eye. He
acknowledged them not at all, as they moved on.

‘Do you know much about the history of reifs?’ Wade asked.

‘I learnt a
after their
facility to
its leaders
them.’

fair bit from Keech. They were reanimated murder victims sent
killers, mindless in the beginning, then becoming AI as the
memcord dead minds became available. The Cult came along after,
twisting doctrine to fit the reality only when that reality suited

‘Simplistic,’ said Wade.

Janer glanced at him. ‘I only recently learnt about how the Cult imploded,
when reifs many centuries old could no longer espouse such simplistic beliefs.
I know things are more complicated than that, but do I care enough to find out
exactly how? Not really.’

A turning in the path revealed considerable industry below, around the huge,
nearly completed ship. Janer now saw that what he had first taken to be the
stripped trunks of dead trees in the dingle ahead were in fact nine masts
rearing from the ship’s decks and its tiered deckhouses. Skeletal Golem
glinted in the sunlight as they connected rigging, hauled up spars, cable
motors, and the enormous rolls of monofabric sails that the living sails would
control.

‘Impressive,’ he said.

‘It is,’ Wade agreed. ‘The designs for such vessels have been around since
before we left Earth, and improved upon considerably over that time. But, with
abundant energy and gravmotors, there’s never been the need to actually build
one.’

‘Until now.’

‘Yes.’

They continued down to the deforested area, where Janer observed huge open
crates from which equipment was being lugged across to the ship by treaded
robotic handlers. This was the big stuff that needed to be placed inside the
hull before the Golem bonded the last hull-planks into place. He paused to
watch this work, letting Wade get ahead of him.

‘What do you think?’ he subvocalized.

No reply from the hive mind. Janer peered down at his shoulder box, then after
a moment tapped it with his finger. One of the two hornets inside toppled
over. Janer removed the box, pressed an indentation along the edge to flip up
the lid. He prodded both hornets with his fingertip. They were both dead. He
closed the box and transferred it to his pocket.

‘Your hornets dying should not disconnect the com-link,’ he said quietly. He
reached up, pulled the hivelink from his earlobe, and dropped that into his
pocket too. ‘I think I’m exactly where you want me to be, but it would seem
you and I are not the only ones to know that.’

He walked on after Wade.

* * * *

On the planet Hive, the ancient hive mind sensed the probing presence of one
of its brethren, but ignored it, aware that its own gradual fragmentation made
it vulnerable to such inspection. The schisms inside it were becoming
difficult to bridge or heal. It realized that this had happened to an earlier
aspect of itself some time in a past immensely dim and distant. It had also
happened to one of its ancient brethren a mere ten thousand years ago and—that

event occurring during an ice age—all but one of the fragments of the mind
concerned had died. The remaining fragment had then, over the intervening
time, grown into the new mind—the youngest and most coherent of them all, and
the most naive. The one now trying to make contact.

‘What are you doing?’ was the essence of the young mind’s question, though
hive mind communication was not so easily amenable to human translation.

Ignoring it, the old mind considered its own future, or lack of one.

This was the way hive minds procreated: the networks of hives grew large and
unwieldy, began to divide, as did the consciousness that spread across them,
those portions of consciousness warring with each other as they sought
self-definition, ego. In any other time the mind would have had to accept the
death of self, but now it seemed the humans and their technologies offered
alternatives. But were they real? Only just managing to still hold itself
together, the mind could not decide.

‘You cut my link. (What are you doing?) Why did you cut my link? (What are you
doing?)’ The younger mind was growing more insistent; linking itself closer in
through the gaps growing in the old mind.

‘Stop interfering. Go away.’

But the young mind kept asking questions—kept probing. The old mind tried to
shut out the babble as it again returned to introspection.

If it loaded itself to crystal, memcorded itself, would it truly continue?
Even humans, whose technology this was, were undecided. The reifications were
a prime example of this indecision. They believed the body sacred, and that
there could be no real life without it. They claimed their cult was not a
religion, for they did not believe in souls or an afterlife, yet the
foundation of their cult was just as irrational. The mind itself badly wanted
to live, but was now truly divided over the issue: both accepting the
inevitability of physical death and wanting to load to crystal, yet not
accepting Death in any form. The latter attitude arose from the more physical
aspect of it, and the most visceral and emotional. Reality did not impinge one
wit. That part of the mind railed against Death, wanted to bring it down and
sting it into oblivion. It viewed Death as some entity that needed to be
fought, as a personification like the Grim Reaper which, if defeated, would
remove any ending to life. That part was insane, but nevertheless its presence
deadlocked the mind’s more logical side. Internalized, the dispute would not
end, would only become the source of a greater splitting of the mind’s
mentality.

‘I know you‘re going after sprine. You’ll get yourself killed, then the AIs
will restrict us further.’

Despite its concerns for its own mortality, this evinced amusement in the old
mind.

‘Naive,’ it told the other.

‘No, just not senile,’ the youngster spat back.

The old mind’s amusement grew.

‘Don’t do this. Recall your agent,’ the young mind begged.

The old mind groped for internal perception, located some information in
partially dislocated memory, and showed reams of code to the younger mind.

‘What? What?’

‘Child, it is the genome of the Spatterjay leech.’

The young mind retreated in confusion: ‘(What are you doing?) (What are you
doing?)’

Amusement faded as the old mind perceived how very little time it had left.
Isolating its less sane aspects had accelerated the process of its internal
division elsewhere. And loading itself to crystal in its present state would
not halt that process, for it would merely then be mirrored in crystal. It
needed instead the schematic for sanity that could only be created quickly
enough in the faster outside world. The two recordings—one of this self and
one of the isolated self—must clearly find that schematic soon. It was
unfortunate that the less sane self, which had departed first, still believed
it possible to kill Death, and had created the means . . .

* * * *

7

Hammer Whelks:
the hammer whelk is close kin to the frog whelk, but is also its chief
predator. Like their kin, the large adult hammer whelks breed in the ocean
trenches, releasing eggs to float up to the surface and hatch. The baby
whelks, washed inshore, settle in island waters and congregate in packs.
Physically, hammer whelks differ from frog whelks in two main respects. Their
single foot, rather than used for leaping, terminates in a large bony hammer
used for smashing shell, and they possess a tubular sucker for capturing prey.
Their mouths are equally as nightmarish. Every year they decimate the frog
whelk peregrination out to the depths, but, just as the frog whelks are
vulnerable to the hammers, the hammer whelks themselves are vulnerable to the
crushing jaws of the rhinoworm —

The day was growing oppressive, cloud hanging in a jade ceiling above them, as
threatening in its aspect as was the reality of life aboard the Vignette.

‘They’re all lash-happy,’ said Silister, leaning over to whisper into
Davy-bronte’s ear. ‘Take that Drooble.’ He nodded towards the foremast where
the man named was tied, the wounds in his back already healing after the
thrashing Orbus had earlier given him. ‘Orbus flogged him three times on that
last trip, and I heard he has keelhauled him twice before that.’

‘Keep your voice down, and your head down,’ said Davy-bronte. ‘With luck we
can jump ship at the Sargassum—get some other Captain to take us on.’

Silister eyed his companion. ‘We should have left with the rest of them.’

‘Yeah, but we were greedy and foolish.’

‘We weren’t greedy. We wanted what was owed us.’ Silister winced as he said
it. Orbus had fed them enough seacane rum to pickle a rhinoworm, then brought
them aboard on the pretext of finding them their wages, where he commenced
being profligate with even more rum. The next thing they knew they were waking
up from a drunken coma with the Vignette out of sight of any port. ‘You
realize we’re the only normal ones aboard,’ he added.

Davy-bronte nodded as he continued working the caulking between the planks of
the ship’s lifeboat. This had been their only chance to talk openly for some
time: alone here in the lifeboat hanging, horizontal, from its davits over the
side of the ship. Silister had tried bringing up the subject below decks once,
then quickly mumbled off into silence. It was only then he had realized all
the other Hoopers aboard with them were in love with pain. They were all much
older than himself and Davy-bronte, and all bore that certain glassy look in
their eyes.

‘Are you two done in there yet!’ Orbus bellowed from his chair up on the
bridge.

‘Nearly finished, Cap’n!’ Davy-bronte called.

‘So you’ll not be needing a little motivation?’

‘No thank you, Captain Orbus,’ said Davy-bronte, glancing at Silister with his
expression unreadable.

Silister swallowed dryly, and wondered how much longer he could contain his
anger. He reached out and ran his tar-smeared fingers down the blade of the
panga he had brought into the lifeboat with him. ‘No way, absolutely no way at
all is he going to put me up against that fucking mast.’ But even as he said
it he knew it was a promise he could not fulfil. Orbus could break him like a
twig, and for that matter so could any other member of this older crew.

Davy-bronte nodded, then reached inside his shirt to pull free and partially
reveal the weapon he carried.

‘Hell,’ said Silister, ‘where did you get that from?’

‘Cost me all my savings, plus a loan from Olian’s I’ll be paying off for a few
years yet.’ Davy-bronte pushed the quantum cascade laser back out of sight.

Suddenly Silister found hope. Maybe they might be able to get out of this.

‘Aw, not you again. Bugger off!’ yelled Orbus, then anything further he said
was drowned out by a loud roar.

The two juniors looked across into a blast of spray blowing over the ship as
if a squall had just hit. A flattened ovoid, four metres across, was rising
out of the sea on turbines. It was fashioned of brassy metal bloomed with the
marks of heat treatment, and streaked with weedy growths and rashes of orange
barnacles. It seemed a patchwork of old and new, for gleaming armour abutted
old tarnished surfaces. Deep in dark hollows all about it, red lights glinted.
From other hollows protruded the barrels and launch tubes of various weapons.

Davy-bronte grabbed the back of Silister’s shirt and hauled him down. Cupping
a hand around his friend’s ear he hissed, ‘No way is that thing from the
Polity!’

‘Now I said bugger off!’ Orbus bellowed, standing firm.

‘Is he blind?’ Silister asked.

The thing revolved slightly, as if scanning down the length of the ship. One
square indentation in its surface widened like a camera shutter, and extruded
a square tube. The huge drone rose higher and Silister saw that underneath it
trailed a large net bag fashioned from cable. He glanced aside and saw
Davy-bronte gripping the butt of his QC laser, but thought that a pointless
gesture. He felt this confirmed when the drone folded out two large gleaming
claws—evidently a new addition—from its surface, leaving claw-shaped recesses
behind. It drifted to the bows, still kicking up spume, then swung in,
crushing the rail and shoving the ship sideways. It reached out one claw and
snipped off the foremast, then with the other claw snatched Drooble up over
the stump and dropped him into the trailing bag. Shadow opened above—the sail
abandoning them. Something whined and swivelled. A black line cut up from the
drone. There came a flash and a dull detonation, then pieces of sail were
raining down on the deck.

‘Get off my fucking ship!’ Orbus screamed, and began firing his pulse rifle.

The square tube extruded further and spat something trailing a line. From
behind Orbus, Silister saw a harpoon punch right through the Captain’s body,
then open out four barbs. The huge drone reeled the bellowing Captain in,
hard, smashing him through the side rail. It then tore him off the harpoon and
inserted him into the same bag as Drooble. By now other crew were reacting:
one firing an old shotgun, another causing still more danger to his fellows
through ricochets as he opened up with some ancient automatic weapon.

Davy-bronte began drawing his laser till Silister, panicking, grabbed his arm.

‘We’ve only got one chance.’ Davy-bronte pointed at the davit rope nearest to
Silister. ‘On my signal, you cut that one!’

It took a moment for Silister to grasp what his companion intended, then he
understood. Releasing Davy-bronte’s arm he took up his panga and turned to the
rope nearest to him.

‘Now!’ commanded Davy-bronte, aiming and firing his laser.

With his panga, Silister chopped straight through his rope. Davy-bronte’s
laser cut slower, so the lifeboat fell at forty-five degrees down the side of
the ship into the sea, but fortunately the bows bounced up rather than
penetrated the surface. Silister was flung over the side, came up smacking his
head underneath the boat, then ducked back up beside it where Davy-bronte
hauled him. It had fortunately happened so fast no leeches had time to attach.
The small craft was now in the lee of the ship, sheltered from the storm blast
of the drone’s turbines.

‘Under this,’ urged Davy-bronte, pulling across a tarpaulin.

‘That thing’ll have scanning gear.’

‘Then let’s hope it doesn’t use it. I don’t think rowing away now is going to
help us.’

They hid under the tarpaulin as the courses of their boat and the Vignette
itself slowly diverged. But the mainmast came down with a horrible crackling
and splashed into the sea only metres away from them. A couple of loops of
rigging hooked over their little boat, tilting it and binding it to the main
ship. Over the roar of turbines, the screaming, bellowing and weapon fire
continued—and now something was on fire up there. Silister listened to the
metronomic regularity of the harpoon firing, then the sounds of weapons
ceased. Only the turbines and the bellowing and screaming continued.

‘Shit!’ yelped Davy-bronte.

The huge drone was now moving around the beleaguered ship blasting a cloud of
spindrift ahead of it, its cable bag packed full of the Vignette’s struggling
and shouting crew. The drone slid above them, its turbine blast driving their
small craft down and nearly swamping it, but the two crewmen lay perfectly
still. It spat something that smashed through the side of the main ship and
detonated. Then the drone rolled to one side and dropped down into the waves,

taking its catch with it.

Silister hurled back the tarpaulin and brought his panga slicing down on the
rigging that was dragging them down. Davy-bronte immediately started bailing
with just his hands.

‘No antigravity—so it didn’t want the Warden to detect it,’ remarked Silister,
shakily, then turned to help his friend with the bailing.

Waves of steam fogged over them as the Vignette quenched its fire in the sea.
By the time they were sure their own boat would not sink, the ship had gone
under.

* * * *

An iron-coloured seahorse with topaz eyes unwound its bifurcated tail from its
roost in a peartrunk tree, turned and drifted gently away through the foliage.
SM13’s instinct had been to immediately contact the Warden and spill
everything it had seen and all it thought might have happened here. However,
Thirteen was now a free drone and no longer under orders to report such things
to its master, and was currently on an Out-Polity world where there was no
legal requirement to inform any authorities of possibly nefarious doings. The
drone did feel some moral obligation to report, but not because of what had
happened to some reifications or to the Batians. The former were no more dead
than they had been before, and for the latter death was an occupational
hazard. No, the little drone felt obliged to report because five Hoopers had
died.

Thirteen drifted down to a level where the foliage was not so thick, then
followed a path between globular scabrous peartrunks from which bark had been
ripped so that now green sap oozed out like engine oil. On the other hand,
reporting those deaths would not help the dead . . . Thirteen bobbed in the
air—the only outward expression of the frustration the little drone was
feeling. Really, the presence of a hostile alien life form on Spatterjay did
come somewhere within the Warden’s remit, even though it was no longer
Thirteen’s responsibility to report it. The little drone just feared
contacting the Warden because, even though now a free drone, Thirteen still
feared subsumption. Eventually it braced itself and opened a channel. The
reply was immediate.

‘What is it, Thirteen?’ the Warden asked.

Thirteen transmitted a copy of the image file recorded last night, and waited.

‘I am aware of the hooder’s presence, but wonder why it should be my concern?’

‘I just thought you’d better know,’ said Thirteen grudgingly.

‘I know. The creature was transported here in the cargo aboard the Gurnard.
That ship is a free trader and so the Polity has no responsibility for its
cargo.’

‘I thought. . . alien life forms down here . . .’

‘The hooder is merely a dangerous animal. If I took responsibility for every
dangerous animal on the surface of Spatterjay I would probably need a couple
of SMs down there covering every square kilometre of land and every cubic
kilometre of sea.’

‘What about the Prador when it came?’

‘Do you need a lecture in precisely what comes within a Warden’s remit?’

‘Perhaps I do.’

‘The relevant sections stipulate that I am to watch for anything representing
a danger or a potential danger to the Polity, and I am empowered to intervene
when any such danger generally threatens the population or the biosphere of
Spatterjay, but especially when caused by anything proceeding from the Polity
itself. The Prador, Ebulan, fell under both sections.’

‘Ebulan came from the Prador Third Kingdom.’

‘Then the danger he represented was general and not especial.’

‘Seems a bit specious.’

There came a long pause from the Warden, then, ‘I could stretch the terms of

my remit and interfere, but I do not want to, in a situation where the danger
to this small group—which they dealt with adequately enough—was brought on by
themselves.’

‘And the Hoopers?’

‘Unfortunate, but I cannot take responsibility for the individual lives of any
who are not citizens of the Polity.’

Feeling a sudden daring, Thirteen said, ‘You’ve changed.’

Again that long pause, then, ‘I may send Sniper, when he is available.’

‘Sniper? What’s Sniper doing?’

The communication link cut and now, as well as being free, Thirteen realized
it was completely out of the circuit. Perhaps this was why drones like Sniper
sought employment with AIs like the Warden. Independence did have its
drawbacks.

Eventually Thirteen dropped lower, entered an area where a stand of
putrephallus plants had been crushed, and viewed the discarded dead segment of
hooder lying on the plant’s stinking phallic bed, then it slowly turned in
mid-air. This was where the drone had tracked the hooder to last night, before
returning to the compound. The creature had been moving very slowly, and
because of its starveling condition and the damage inflicted on it by the APW,
the drone had not thought it would be going much further for a while. It was
gone now, however. Thirteen rose up from the trees, turned on all its scanning
gear, and began to search.

* * * *

You’ve changed. The Warden came at that statement from every angle. It was
specific enough to be worrying, yet vague enough that no clear confirmation
seemed possible. The AI ran diagnostic programs through itself, ran system
comparisons between its backup memories and present attitudes. There seemed a
vague indication that it had returned to an earlier mindset in which it more
closely adhered to its Polity remit, and was generally more circumspect. This
could have been caused by the compression process it had undergone to escape
being subsumed by the drone, Sniper. That had certainly been hurried, after
the shock of discovering the ancient war drone possessed a larger and more
powerful mentality than itself—built upon the foundation of a life centuries

long. Perhaps that was the problem: the whole experience had been humbling.
However, a further possibility was that Thirteen’s own perception had changed:
becoming a free drone could prove both an illuminating and frightening
transformation.

‘Yes, what is it, Seven?’

The submind had been trying to attract the Warden’s attention for some
microseconds.

‘Captain Sprage, boss. He’s opened a channel up here again through that
conferencing link of his.’

‘Then you can again inform the Captain that whilst Erlin Taser Three Indomial
is a valued Polity citizen, her stepping outside the Line and putting herself
in danger is none of my concern. And, Seven, I am not your “boss”. I am the
Polity Warden of Spatterjay.’ As the Warden finished speaking, it felt
something akin to a flush of embarrassment. Would I have said something like
that before?

‘He’s not calling about that. He’s calling about a missing ship.’

‘That happens. Again, it is not my concern.’

‘But. . . Warden, he’s got some coordinates from the point where the
conferencing link to the Vignette went offline. He’s very concerned about it,
but only wants to know if you might have seen anything with any of your eyes.’

The Warden did a fast scan through its Polity remit and found that this
situation fell in one of those grey areas. Though this might concern only the
loss of a few individuals, it had been communicated to the AI via one of the
sort-of rulers of the human population here, and so might pertain to something
important.

‘Very well.’

Seven transmitted the coordinates and the precise time when the link went off.
The Warden scanned the memory of the satellite eye concerned—it was memory
they held for a few days before deleting. The coordinates centred on a cloud
mass, which immediately aroused the AI’s suspicions—if anyone wanted to hide

their actions from it, they would perform them underneath such a mass.
Searching through the range of the eye’s scan, the AI found very little until
moving into infrared. There—the vague blob of the ship, an explosion then a
fire, then the heat flickering out, along with that blob itself, as the ship
no doubt sank. An accident? Hoopers were not particularly prone to them,
though they did carry gunpowder, explosives and sometimes Polity weapons
aboard. Moreover, the Vignette’s record was not a good one. The Warden
ruminated over the response it would give, before reluctantly packaging the
relevant information and transmitting it.

‘Sniper, check this out will you,’ the AI also sent—then fretted that it might
be sending napalm to put out a fire.

* * * *

The industry of the Golem and other Cybercorp machines was fast and
frightening. Ron had earlier expressed an interest in being involved in the
construction, but Bloc had told him no humans were allowed on site—it was just
too dangerous for them. As he saw a skeletal Golem rush past with a ten-metre
beam on its shoulder, halt abruptly, spin the beam round then throw it up
through a gap in the hull planking, Janer now understood why. A moment’s
inattention might result in a human ending up smeared into the woodwork.

‘You note, they are not only using wood,’ said Wade, pointing through the
perimeter fence.

Janer scanned the site, noting composite beams resting on a row of trestles
nearby. A spiderlike robot was hauling a sheet of some sort of metal up the
side of the ship. The huge rudder, which even now was being swung into place
and hung from a crane located on the deck above, bore the logo of a company
Janer knew specialized in the production of bubble-metals—alloys foamed with
inert gas and cast in zero-G so the bubbles remained evenly dispersed. The air
around him was also redolent with the smell of fast-bonding epoxies.

‘Not a nail in sight,’ he commented.

‘Even Hoopers don’t use nails in the construction of their ships,’ said Wade,
turning to walk along the perimeter. ‘They use pegs and dovetails and mortise
joints, and that has not changed even since abundant metals have become
available to them.’

‘You know about shipbuilding?’ Janer asked.

‘That’s just plain woodworking I’m talking about. However,’ Wade tapped his
own forehead, ‘I have recently loaded much about the craft.’

Janer paused to consider that. Humans could load information directly into
their minds, but to do it they required some kind of hardware in their heads.
The process was very much easier for Golem. Just in this short walk down from
the compound, Janer had almost forgotten what Wade actually was.

‘Why are you here?’ he asked.

‘Why are you?’ Wade countered, studying him. He then went on, ‘I’m a free
Golem, I go where the interest takes me . . . Now, that looks like a weak
point.’ Wade pointed, and it took Janer a second to realize the Golem was
indicating at a join in the fence beside one of the pearwood posts.

‘Yes . . . ?’ said Janer cautiously.

Wade gave him an unreadable look, reached out and shoved his fingers through
the fence mesh. Janer smelt hot ozone, then Wade pulled, and, sparking and
crackling, the fence parted.

‘See, shoddy workmanship,’ said Wade. ‘Shall we?’ He gestured through.

It was certainly dangerous in there, but Janer had always found that avoiding
danger usually resulted in danger blindsiding him. Anyway, he was already
bored with the prospect of sitting around with the rest of the Hoopers, seeing
if it was possible to drink the rum as fast as Forlam could distil it, for
they seemed intent on doing little else. That was, he realized, a sign of them
having accepted immortality: they were able to be still for long periods. He
was not.

‘Okay,’ he said, ducking in ahead of Wade.

The Golem soon overtook him and led the way into the site. Janer hung back for
a moment.

‘You still gone?’

No response from the hivelink. He quickly caught up with Wade.

Now, drawing closer to the big ship, Janer began to get a better impression of
its sheer scale. The side of it was like a cliff ahead of him; its bows rested
on the beach and its stern abutted the first slopes ascending to the peak at
the centre of Mortuary Island.

‘How are they going to launch it?’ he asked.

Wade pointed to the bottom of the hull, which was largely concealed by
construction materials and machinery. ‘There’s a ramp under there, and a few
hundred motorized pallets on which they laid the keel.’

As they passed a stack of timber, Janer peered through a gap to see the gleam
of a metal caterpillar track in the undershadows. They moved on past an open
container half-filled with pipe fittings and prosaically domestic plumbing
items. Another container just behind it contained electrical equipment and
next to this rested a half-used reel of insulated and combined five-core S-con
and fibre-optic cable. Seeing such standard items here was a bit of a
disappointment to Janer—until Wade gestured to something on the hull itself.

‘I knew it would be here,’ said the Golem.

In the side of the ship was a large open portal containing the kind of iris
door more commonly found on space stations. It would be submerged, Janer
realized, below the waterline. As they drew closer he saw that inside, resting
on a ramp leading to this door, was the flattened-torpedo shape of a large
submersible. Around the door itself were the familiar arc-shaped sections of
black metal that were the business end of a shimmer-shield generator. Of
course a shimmer-shield was perfect for this, since it could let the craft out
without letting the water in.

‘Not quite what I would have expected,’ he said.

‘To the letter of Windcheater’s laws, though not exactly in the spirit of
them,’ explained Wade. ‘That sail wants only sailing ships on the surface of
the ocean, and no AG vehicles at all in the sky, but no other technologies
have been proscribed.’

‘Why do they need this, anyway?’ Janer wondered.

‘That’ll be Lineworld Developments. No doubt they originally had some
profitable enterprise in mind.’ Wade shrugged. ‘Of course they’ll not be
pursuing it now.’

Just then a paint-bespattered skeletal Golem stepped in front of them.

‘You should not be here,’ it said. ‘It is unsafe.’

Wade ignored it, just walking on past.

‘Yeah, you’re telling me,’ said Janer, following his new friend.

* * * *

Someone hammered him hard on the back, and Orbus responded by spewing the sea
water from his lungs and taking his first shuddering breath of frigid stinking
air. He opened his eyes and immediately wished he had stayed drowned, but that
was unfortunately an impossibility for any Hooper over a century in age.

‘This is not a nice place,’ said Drooble, going on to smack his fist against
the chest of another crewman to bring him ungently back to consciousness.

There were ten of them confined in the dank space. The cable bag was now
hanging from one weed-covered wall which seemed to be scaled with rough slabs
of metal. Orbus guessed that one of the crew had broken the frayed strand he
could see, to spill them all out on the floor. Certainly their captor or
captors would not have thought to free them, for Orbus recognized, from old
memory, what this place was.

He had been only fifty years old when the Prador had seized Imbretus Station
and herded human captives aboard their ship, before targeting the station’s
reactors with particle beams to leave it a spreading cloud of debris and
incandescent gas. The brutality and horror of the ensuing journey was not so
clear in his memory, though he did know that he had done terrible things in
order to be one of the few survivors to reach Spatterjay. But once on the
planet he now called home, he clearly remembered being made to walk through
tanks of leeches to ensure infection by their virus, just as he still felt the
shame of how he avoided coring by being ready to play an active part in the
sinister games of the Eight. . .

Orbus stood up, a little shakily, and probed the rip across the front of his
plasmesh shirt. The harpoon wound was sealed now—just a star-shaped
indentation in his solar plexus. He felt around his back and ran his fingers
over lumpy nuggets of scar tissue. He was starving—injury hunger. The others,
similarly injured, would feel the same. Drooble had probably been one of the
first to rouse, because the drone had captured him without harpooning, his
only injuries being those Orbus inflicted earlier with a lash because of the
man’s disobedience—and the drowning, of course. The Old Captain looked around.
Most of his crew did not look so good. They had bled, and some of their wounds
were still raw and red. One of them remained unconscious despite Drooble’s
pummelling, and all of them appeared thinner. Their skin was now blue, but not
with cold.

‘Well, Cap’n, what do you reckon?’ Drooble asked.

Orbus reckoned that his own brain had not been working right for a large
portion of a thousand years. The other Captains were right: there was
something wrong with him. He must have been mad not to have recognized a
Prador war drone the instant he set eyes on it. But then, even if he had, what
more could he have done?

‘I reckon we’re fucked,’ said Captain Orbus.

Drooble turned and gazed at him. ‘No shit?’

It was a typically provocative response from a crewman who enjoyed being
punished, but Orbus felt too weary to respond to it.

‘If Prador take prisoners, it’s for one of two purposes,’ he said. ‘That means
we’re either to be the main course, or we’re going to be cored and thralled.’

‘Prador?’ someone murmured incredulously.

‘You want pain, Drooble?’ Orbus asked. ‘Well you’re going to find more of it
here than you’d ever think possible.’

As if to emphasize his words there came a crack from behind him. Orbus stared
at Drooble, saw the horrible avidity in his expression, and wished he felt the
same inclinations, but for a sadist pain only holds any attraction when it is
someone else’s. He turned and eyed the wide door constructed for a shape that

certainly was not human. It had split diagonally and now the two halves of it
were revolving in opposite directions into the uneven wall. He stepped back
amongst his men, noting they possessed the same avidity as Drooble, yet with
some hint of doubt. Perhaps their wiring was not quite so twisted as his.

Then it came through the door and Orbus could not help but gape. This was no
Prador he knew. It was fully limbed, like an adolescent, but no adolescent
grew to this size. This one was black rather than the lurid purples and
yellows of that kind. Its main body was no thicker than its vicious claws; its
visual turret, palp eyes and underslung mouthparts had detached and risen
higher on a corded neck, which seemed to be in the process of growing ringed
plates of armour. Orbus slid a hand down to his belt, found the handle of his
skinning knife and gripped it. He would go for the neck; that seemed the most
vulnerable part.

‘If we all go for it at once, we might be able to bring it down,’ he hissed.

No reaction for a moment, then Drooble stepped forwards. The distorted Prador
reached out almost gently, and closed its claw around the man’s waist. Drooble
gasped as the pressure came on. It merely picked him up and backed to the
door.

‘We should attack it, all of us together,’ repeated Orbus, stepping forward.

But not one of them moved with him.

He turned to them. ‘We’ll die here!’ he said urgently.

They just stared at him glassy-eyed, then turned away as behind him the door
swiftly ground shut.

Perhaps they had found something more alluring than him.

* * * *

Ambel was quite puzzled, and beginning to feel a little annoyed. They had
sighted three turbul shoals over the last few days, then moved the Treader to
intercept them, and on every occasion the shoals had veered aside.

‘That’s bloody odd,’ said Peck. He was standing with his bait plug cutter in
one hand and his new boat line in the other. The line and related equipment
was of Polity manufacture: braided monofilament with a breaking strain of
tonnes, ceramo-carbide hooks, an electric reel powered by a laminar battery
which in turn could be recharged by sunlight, attached to a stubby fishing rod
with a big solid rubber-grip handle. Peck had been wanting to try out his new
toy for a long time, but it seemed rather excessive to use it just for
catching apple-sized boxies.

Ambel slapped him on the shoulder. ‘Never mind, we’ll hit some of the lads
soon.’

Even so, Ambel could not understand why the three turbul shoals had turned
away like that. Were they learning to avoid Hooper ships? He had heard nothing
of it. Or was there something leaking down in the hold, causing some scent to
emanate through the hull and put them off.

‘Just keep an eye out. I’m going to check below.’

Ambel headed for the ladder leading into the hold itself, climbed down inside
and looked around. When he thought about it, there was not much on board that
would put off turbul. Most of the stores here would do just the opposite.
Maybe leech bile, but he had none of that, as he had refined it during the
journey so as to take only a yield of pure sprine to Olian’s. And, anyway,
having just come from there . . . Perhaps there was something else he had
missed? Just then, while he was puzzling, there came a loud thump against the
hull.

‘Turbul! Turbul! They’re coming under!’ came Peck’s excited cry.

Ambel rushed back on deck as his crew began casting their lines. Anne was the
first to hook one, and pulled up a two-metre-long specimen with a shiny
tubular body, randomly spaced blue fins, caiman head and whiplike tail ending
in a hatchet fin. She snatched her hook from its jaws, and it landed thumping
on the deck. With an apologetic look she kicked it sliding and struggling
across to Ambel, as he was the one who always dealt with anything this large.
He stamped his foot on its lashing tail, clamped its jaws shut in his right
hand, then placed his left hand behind its head. Releasing the tail he pulled
with his right and pushed with his left. With a sucking crunch the head came
out half a metre, the fins disappearing into its body. He heaved again, and
the quivering tube of flesh slid off across the deck, so he was left holding
the head, the long spine and attached bag of internal organs. From the spine,
fins sticking out all round at the end of jointed bones flicked and quivered,
and at the opposite end the tail still thrashed. He cast this remnant over the
side and watched it swim away, while the rest of the crew continued pulling in
more of these piscine creatures, but smaller ones. The shoal, he saw, was
heading under the ship then turning abruptly away to port. Something was

definitely spooking them. Perhaps there was a big deep-sea heirodont somewhere
nearby, which accounted for the behaviour of the previous shoals? But he
dismissed this thought as he baited his hook with a plug of rhinoworm steak,
cast his line, and immediately hooked another turbul.

Soon the deck was littered with their tubular bodies and glistening with
slime. Anne brought over a turbul, leech-scarred and painfully thin, which
told them they were reaching the tail end of the shoal.

‘Barrels and spiced vinegar,’ he told her when she unhooked this sorry
creature and cast it back over the side.

‘Bugger me,’ said Peck. ‘This’n’s a big bugger.’

Ambel glanced across at the crewman, who was leaning back against the pull of
his line, which, now humming like a power cable, angled down at forty degrees
into the sea. Peck, Ambel knew, was not exactly a weakling, so it would take a
seriously large turbul to give him any trouble. He coiled his own line and
moved over behind the man, while other crew members, discarding leech-hit
rejects, coiled up their lines and turned to watch.

‘Bugger,’ said Peck again—it was his favourite word.

Ambel eyed the short composite rod, which now actually had a bend in it.
Peck’s knuckles were white around the handle. For anyone else, Ambel would
have suggested they had snagged the seabed, but Peck knew when he had a live
one on, and the way the line was moving in the sea also confirmed this.

‘You might have hooked a heirodont,’ Ambel suggested.

Peck was now beginning to slide against his will towards the rail. Ambel
stepped forwards and hooked an arm around his waist.

‘Not. . . getting me bloody . . . tackle.’

Peck’s torso was as rigid as stone, and even Ambel had to strain to prevent
him going over the side. A turbul body slid down against his feet, then
another one. The deck was tilting.

‘Any suggestions?’ Ambel asked generally.

‘Switch ... on the side . . .’

Ambel peered round at the reel. There were three switches there. Suddenly the
line cut round to the stern of the Treader. As it chopped into the rail, Sild
threw himself sideways to avoid being decapitated. Then the line began to drag
down, till it was cutting into the deck. Ambel had visions of it going through
the ship like a cheese wire. He reached round and clicked a switch.

‘No . . . that one!’

The reel started droning, pulling them towards the edge, their boots tearing
up splinters from the deck. Boris grabbed the back of Ambel’s belt and held
on, but found he was being dragged along as well. Ambel reached out and
clicked another switch. The sound was a kind of slither; that of a very sharp
knife cut hard through air. The three men collapsed in a heap as the tension
abruptly came off.

Peck was the first to his feet. ‘Breaks the line where it’s weakest,’ he
explained.

Ambel stood and eyed the man’s new fishing gear, wondering if he would be wise
to throw it over the side right then.

‘Fuck me,’ said Boris.

They turned to look at him and he held up the stump of his hand. His fingers
were lying scattered on the deck at his feet.

‘Peck, fetch your needle, lad,’ said Ambel mildly. ‘Then I think we’re going
to have a little chat.’

* * * *

With the tip of one finger Erlin probed the end of her tongue, and was sure
she could feel a hollow developing there. She had been well supplied with

dome-grown food upon her arrival at the island, but in the last few months had
needed to eke that out. Now that she had none to eat, the Spatterjay viral
mutation seemed to be trying to make up lost ground. Perhaps, she speculated,
it was this that also seemed to be altering her perception? No, she decided,
things only looked different because she was far from any regions she had
previously explored with Ambel aboard the Treader.

This island was recently volcanic, in geological terms: basalt guts running in
a highway down from the classically shaped volcano behind her and spearing out
to sea to form a natural jetty. The end of this promontory was occupied by a
cluster of frog whelks, like a flock of sheep driven to the sea’s edge. From
what she could see at this distance, they were of a different variety from any
she had encountered before: their shells were squatter in shape and the two
yellows of old butter. The rise and fall of the waves along the stone
perimeter also occasionally revealed the three larger hammer whelks creeping
up on them. These were also different: more streamlined, their shells tilted
backwards and wide and flat on top, like Nefertiti’s headdress. But then Erlin
had been rudely awakened to the fact that she had not yet seen, in the flesh,
all the whelks that Spatterjay offered.

‘It’s very different here,’ she commented, as she drew out her meal of
rhinoworm meat. Perhaps she did not need to do this, as Huff, Puff and Zephyr
seemed equally as interested in the drama unfolding on the promontory.

‘It is catalogued,’ Zephyr replied.

‘Really?’ she replied.

‘The Warden now back in charge has spent many years using its subminds to
study this planet thoroughly. Probably a necessary diversion.’

‘From what?’

The Golem sail looped its neck round and down so its head came level with
hers. ‘From its very limited duties here. It is a runcible AI, with the
capacity for governing a high-tech, civilized planet, yet it here only
possesses limited power to intercede in matters beyond the Line. That is
something Polity citizens arriving here tend to forget.’

Erlin merely grunted, and continued chewing on her meat. She then turned her
gaze inland to where the dingle was swamping the old volcanic outflow. The
peartrunk trees there were lower than usual, their trunks standing like the
open cageworks of mangroves. Further inland grew yanwoods, and scattered amid
them were trees resembling pines. On the beach, which seemed comprised of

obsidian fragments, a couple of small armadillo-like heirodonts were snuffling
about. Erlin finally returned her attention to the whelks.

The hammer whelks had nearly reached their prey, and were now poised on the
ledge below them. The attack was fast. All three whelks flicked upright, at
the perimeter of the frog whelk cluster, everting their tubular suckers.
Immediately the frog whelks exploded from the stone, each propelled high in
the air by its single powerful foot and splashing into the sea all around. All
but three of them. The hammer whelks flowed over their victims, extruded their
bone-tipped hammer feet and began working on them like a team of blacksmiths.
Scattering fragments of shell around like broken crockery, they soon exposed
the meat they sought. But then one of the de-shelled frog whelks escaped,
bouncing along the promontory, a glob of pink flesh shaped like an inverted
carrot with two eye-stalks above and one cantilevered foot below. Puff
launched and, with a couple of flaps, was soon directly above the fugitive.
Noticing the sail, the denuded whelk tried to leap into the sea, but Puff
snatched it in mid-air and quickly chomped it down. That was perhaps merciful,
since it would never have survived without its shell, and its death would have
been slower in the sea. Erlin returned her attention to the others. Two of the
hammer whelks were now fighting over a single frog whelk, whilst the third
hammer whelk dragged its own catch out of range. The two contestants tore
their victim apart between them, then seemed content with their separate
spoils.

‘It is all the time. Everywhere ...’ said Zephyr, gazing with what Erlin
thought was a peculiar intensity towards the whelks.

‘What is?’ she asked.

‘They are not alive,’ said Zephyr, turning to her.

‘Of course they are.’ Erlin shrugged. ‘Well in some cases not any more.’

‘Dead?’ Zephyr asked, something leaden and weird in his voice.

‘Well that’s the way it goes.’

‘Time we moved on,’ said Zephyr.

Erlin did not bother to argue. She stood and turned her back to Huff, who had
been carrying her for some time now, but it was Zephyr who grabbed the handle
protruding from the harness she wore and hauled her into the sky. Perhaps Huff

had grown tired of her chattering. As she was carried back over the island,
Erlin stared with fascination down into the caldera. This contained a steaming
lake around which a herd of half-seen somethings were moving. Then, in the
ocean extending beyond the other side of the island she saw huge floating
plants much like water lilies. Large pale blue blossoms floated on the
surface.

‘Look, flowers,’ said Erlin, continuing to munch on the steak she had
retained. When she finally finished it, and licked her fingers clean, she saw
that her digits had become much the same blue as the blossoms below, and
acknowledged that maybe Zephyr was carrying her because he was the only one
safe in doing so now.

‘Lilies,’ said Zephyr. ‘Of course.’

* * * *

The giant whelk closely focused one of her dinner-plate eyes on the
ceramo-carbide hook embedded in the tip of her tentacle. The thing had
actually ripped through her flesh; nothing else had caused her such damage in
a very long time. This only made her angrier, as certainly this hook, and its
ten metres of line attached, had come from the ship above her. She had seen
turbul being hauled up there and in all the excitement had tried grabbing one.
Big mistake. She then recalled other injuries she had suffered: memories
reawakened in the newly functioning lobes of her brain.

The brood comprising herself and her siblings had been large, but over the
years had been whittled down. Initially, nearly all the other denizens of the
ocean had presented a problem to them. Leeches, given the opportunity, would
snatch plugs of flesh; prill often planed through to scythe off the occasional
tentacle of the unwary. She herself had lost a tentacle that way, but soon
regrew it. Turbul took half their number, avoiding only those whose shells had
hardened sufficiently, like her own. Glister ambushes took her kin, but only
when the parent went off to feed its gargantuan appetite. One once attacked
her, too, but had been unable to dislodge her. Then, beginning their long
migration into the depths, they began to mature and grow stronger. In time her
own skin became too tough for leeches to penetrate, and her shell too hard for
turbul to crack. Only larger prill and glisters managed to snatch away the odd
tentacle, but that soon became a dangerous option for them, as even they
eventually became prey for herself and her kin. But deeper down the brood soon
learnt that there were other, larger predators.

A monstrous heirodont had assailed and crunched down many of them before the
parent attacked it. The giant whelk remembered that battle, remembered hiding
in a crevice with her shell broken and ichor leaking out around her,
attracting prill. She remembered the death screams, then a long silence before
finally her parent’s shell tumbled down the slope past her, utterly cleaned
out. She stayed in the crevice until her own shell healed, feeding on anything

that got close enough. Then she emerged and dragged herself down to rejoin her
own kind below.

The giant whelk again studied the hook and saw that quickly forming scar
tissue had sealed it in place. Whipping her tentacle back she observed the
line looping above her. Different movements of her tentacle caused changing
patterns in the line: there a sine wave travelling its length, and there an
endlessly revolving coil. These patterns pleased her, and rather than tear the
hook out, she drew the line back and wrapped it around her tentacle.
* * * *

8

Packetworms:
these segmented worms obtain most of their nutrition by boring through
compacted mud layers and sedimentary rock. It is theorized that the
evolutionary pressures driving them into this lifestyle were in force before
the rise of the leeches. A billion years ago, after five billion years of
competitive evolution and no mass extinctions, Spatterjay was seemingly
overburdened with life, resulting in every possible niche being competed for
and exploited. Few people have actually seen living specimens of this
creature, its home environment being far below the seabed, but they do make
their presence known. The casts they throw up—of ground rock, calcined
limestone and clay—are of a similar composition to cement, and set as hard.
And since some packetworms grow to two metres wide and fifty long, those worm
casts can be large enough to protrude from the ocean surface. Their almost
cubic configuration has in the past caused them to be mistaken for the ruined
buildings of some alien race, and they form the foundations of many atolls and
even some islands on Spatterjay. The packetworm’s physical biology, working
five degrees hotter than that of most other native forms, and being highly
acidic, is inimical to the Spatterjay virus -

The SMs numbered six to ten, in their standard format geosurvey shells, were
not built for speed as that was not necessary for them to catch or escape
rocks. Each of them measured two metres from top to base, and about a metre
wide. If they bore a resemblance to anything, it was, with numerous blocky
additions, to ancient paraffin tilley lamps sprayed sky green. They were also
now devoid of the ‘attitude’ program they had run while occupying enforcer
shells and attacking the Prador ship ten years ago. They were also unarmed.

‘Okay, you lot,’ Sniper addressed them. ‘Keep searching for that Golem. I’ll
get back to you.’

‘Yes, Sniper,’ they all replied at once.

‘Eleven, Twelve, you’re with me,’ Sniper then sent.

SM12 had been the Warden’s lieutenant during that crucial battle a decade
earlier, and though being physically destroyed, had yet managed to upload from
its cockleshell drone body. When Sniper displaced the Warden he did not
subsume the surviving SMs, but allowed them to choose their own course. Twelve
opted for a new body much like its previous one, but a scallop shell this
time, two metres across. Eleven, having missed all the action while acting as
a signal-relay station, decided on a drone shell made in the mythical dolphin
shape more commonly seen as a door knocker than in any ocean, but one two
metres long. Both of them were armed with needle rail-guns and lasers, both of
them possessed fusion boosters, and both of them had loaded a slightly
adjusted version of ‘attitude’.

Sniper turned in mid-air, watching the drones approach. Twelve had opened his
shell to fold out two boosters, and was hammering towards him rearwards.
Eleven’s booster was positioned with anatomical humour. Sniper transmitted
coordinates to them, then accelerated, and the drones adjusted their course to
match his.

‘Problem, boss?’ asked Eleven.

‘Seems the Vignette might have burned and sunk,’ said Sniper.

‘Could we be the cause?’ asked Twelve. ‘That Captain did seem to resent us,
and his crew weren’t in any hurry to cut him down.’

‘Maybe we were the catalyst,’ Sniper allowed. ‘That’s what we’ll find out.’

As they hurtled across the sky, Sniper transmitted to them all that the Warden
had sent him.

‘Underneath thick cloud,’ Twelve mused. ‘It would be interesting to find out
how many other ships have been in a similar position recently.’

‘I did check,’ said Sniper.

‘How many?’ asked Eleven.

‘None,’ Sniper replied.

Within an hour they were hovering over the sea twenty kilometres east of the
last known coordinates of the Vignette. The cloud was dispersed now, and the
sun a watery green eye above them.

‘Why here?’ asked Eleven.

‘The bottom’s two kilometres down and the current easterly,’ Sniper said. ‘The
ship ain’t going to be directly below where it sank. Can you both pressure
seal?’

‘Can do,’ said Eleven.

‘It was how I was designed before, and how I am designed now,’ said Twelve.

The three of them dropped towards the waves.

‘We’ll use U-space com. Stay alert, and keep all your detectors at maximum
range,’ Sniper ordered, just as all three of them splashed down.

They stabbed into the sea, punching white-water trails like icicles, then
allowed themselves to drift and sink with the current. Sniper scanned the
other two, to witness Twelve retracting its boosters, and Eleven becoming
stone rigid. Both of them would be filling their interstices with crash foam
and adjusting other internal structures to withstand the pressure. The old war
drone himself briefly tested his underwater tractor drive, and left his ports
open to the water. He was itching for an excuse to use his supercavitation
field, but supposed reluctantly that travelling at mach three underwater would
not help him find the Vignette any quicker. He also opened his various weapons
ports, to prevent sudden pressure inclusions should he need to shoot anything.
Opening a port, with normal air pressure inside, to sea water under high
pressure, was not a good idea, especially if you were in the process of trying
to rapidly launch a mini torpedo. Also, the tractor drive needed its internal
pressures equalized to its environment in order to function quickly and
efficiently. But this was all the preparation he needed. Most of his new body
was as dense as iron with very few air spaces, and his shell could take a
great deal more than the water pressure he would find two kilometres down.

As the three drones descended through clear water, leeches, streaming towards
them like shoals of flat eels, grated mouthparts against their armour then
dropped away. When a leech the size of a small ship started to show an
interest, Sniper brought to bear a device he had been anxious to try out.
Loosely based on the Prador water gun, this weapon ionized and
field-accelerated a jet of superheated sea water. Sniper called it his
dissuader.

‘Remember what the Warden said,’ Twelve warned him.

‘Like a few leeches less might be a problem?’

The leech came on. Underwater, its body was leaf-shaped and moved with slow
undulations that swept it forward rapidly. It went for Sniper—the larger
prey—its stem an extending metre-wide mouth, starting to bell out to encompass
him whole. Sniper fired, and it was as if a bar of hot metal stabbed out
between himself and the leech, super-heated steam exploding in enormous
bubbles away from it. Where it struck, the creature’s flesh just melted away
in dark clouds, retreating like butter before a blow torch.

‘An effective weapon,’ commented Twelve.

‘Now that’s gotta smart!’ exclaimed Eleven.

The leech coiled in on itself, globular, and began to ascend in a mass of
bubbles. The three continued down.

Deeper, and leeches were now somnolent strands drifting in the water. Glisters
swam here, but never too close. A shoal of boxies turned away with geometric
precision, and a small heirodont flicked its vertical sharkish tail and swept
past with its mandibles clattering. Distantly came the moan of one of its
larger cousins. The water was murky now, but Sniper soon discerned a mountain
range below them. They swept the bottom with refined sonar beams, looking for
sign of the ship. Sniper identified slopes of shell scree, and some intact
empty shells so large he could have motored inside them.

‘I’ll do a wide scan over this grid. You two search one of the squares
starting here,’ he sent. The drones’ method of underwater locomotion consisted
of squid jets, so they would not be able to keep up even with just his tractor
drive.

‘No need,’ said Eleven, broadcasting coordinates to his two companions.

They scanned down where he indicated, found the broken mast lying on one peak,
then tracked a half-kilometre slide mark down the mountainside to where lay
the ship in two halves.

‘Try to find its crew—they might still be alive,’ sent Sniper.

Hoopers, he knew, might survive even this.

The two little drones circled the two separate halves of the vessel, then
entered one half each. Sniper held back, mapping the wreckage and building
three-D models in his cortex. There, he brought the two halves together,
correcting for damage obviously caused by it striking the underwater mountain
and its long slide down here. It took him only moments to discern that
something had exploded inside it.

‘No one here,’ said Twelve.

‘Not a single one,’ added Eleven.

Sniper closed in on one half, centering himself over where the explosion had
occurred. He reached out with a tentacle and picked up one charred pearwood
beam, then ran another tentacle over its burnt surface. The dense sea water
all around prevented him using his laser spectrometer, so he drew in a small
sample through a microtube, up through his tentacle and inside himself to
analyse in his internal spectrometer. He removed from the results the
signature for carbonized pearwood, then for burnt sea-gourd resin, leech and
turbul ichor, and anything else commonly found on Hooper ships. Soon he had
fined down the results to certain elements in certain proportions. Some kind
of explosive, but this told him nothing he had not already guessed. He tried
another sample at a different location, while Eleven and Twelve searched the
surrounding area for any stripped fish. His fifth try revealed a definite
spike for an uncommon element. It was one of the exotic metals; one of those
discovered by humans only after they had left the solar system, but which
another race had discovered long before. Sniper recognized it instantly—enough
of it having been shot at him over the years.

‘Let’s go,’ he said. ‘There’ll be no survivors here.’

* * * *

Having lost one claw, a few hands, a large proportion of shell and very nearly
his life to an Old Captain called Drum, Vrell was bemused by the behaviour of
his captives. But then perhaps this was the way all Hooper crews behaved: as
meek as Prador children controlled by their father’s pheromones? No, that
wasn’t right. Prador children were only meek towards their own father, not to
some outside threat. The prisoner Captain himself was not so obliging, and had
twice escaped Vrell’s grasp. But why did he not order his crew to attack? It
was all very strange.

Vrell had chosen to use spider thralls. He knew the danger, but the benefits
of using blanks with some autonomy outweighed it. Anyway, before any of these
humans rejected their thralls he would fully core them. But, right now, the
first three he had enslaved he needed to immediately put to work. Thralling
the others would have to wait.

The first blank he programmed to be a pilot, the second a navigator, and the
third an engineer controlling below him the two blanks recently resident in
the larder. The first two now stood at the rebuilt consoles in the control
section. The third waited, with patches and welders, near the ship’s weak
point—where it had been penetrated. Vrell himself monitored the overall
systems of the ship. It was a relief to relinquish some control, yet running
three more slave units shell-welded under his carapace presented different
difficulties. It required a light touch and eternal vigilance. When the
navigator finished mapping the hundreds of kilometres of sea-bottom between
the ship’s present location, just off the Seagre Islands, out to the deep
Lamarck Trench, it was all Vrell could do to not interfere with that blank’s
plotting of an optimum course towards the trench. The navigator had already
been programmed to find a route that continued as deep as possible, but high
enough above major accumulations of silt so as not to disturb them
unnecessarily. And when the pilot started the four big underwater turbines,
Vrell let out a bubbling yelp before remembering this was all according to
plan.

Via a probe floating outside, the Prador watched the ship, seen on one of the
hexagonal screens before him, rise off the bottom in an explosion of silt and
glittering shell. As it began sliding out towards the deeps, he observed huge
funnel-headed worms exposed from underneath the hull, now retreating into
their burrows. Stress readings located for him weaknesses he had earlier
missed, but none of them were critical. The damage inside, mainly caused by
power surges and blown generators, was not structural. In a perfect world he
would have preferred to use the five gravmotors he had repaired, even though
they did not function quite so well with such a mass of water above them. But
that level of AG usage would immediately attract the Warden’s attention.

Bringing the probe on after the ship, Vrell felt some relief when he saw the
massive vessel plane out over an underwater cliff and begin to descend. Most
of the detritus on the hull had been washed away now, so the trail was not so
obvious. Vrell just hoped the disturbance already caused would go unnoticed,

as the currents swiftly dispersed it.

Like a great marine city fashioned vaguely about the shape of a Prador’s
carapace (though not Vrell’s own, now), the ship descended. Vrell returned the
probe to its port and settled back to eye the other screens giving him outside
views. There were not many seagoing leviathans nearby, they having quickly
sensed something larger moving in the water. The seabed was now a wide flat
plain scattered with broken shell, black bones and the occasional forest of
kelp trees rising hundreds of metres tall.

Vrell spotted a large herd of whelks trundling along the bottom like an
armoured division, then the open yellow vaginal splits which, when Vrell
sonar-scanned them, were revealed as the mouths of massive clams. He saw prill
with saucer carapaces five metres across tilting back to observe the ship,
eyes running round their rims like ruby searchlights, sickle feet coiled
underneath. These sprang from the bottom in a cloud of silt, and planed up
like attack craft. In his sanctum Vrell heard distant clangs and scrabblings,
then on a screen watched the frustrated creatures dropping away. He badly
wanted to employ some of the ship’s weapons against them, but again that would
be too revealing. Then, after hours of such progress, the ship reached a
tributary trench leading down into the Lamarck.

It was in the vast oceanic trench lying ahead that Ebulan had originally
concealed the ship, so there was the possibility that any new search for it
might be directed here. However, the trench was thousands of kilometres long,
and in places many kilometres deep. If he concealed the ship well, and used no
traceable energy signatures, Vrell felt his chances of going undetected were
good. He settled down, trying to feel some pleasure from his achievements, but
that was strangely lacking. He felt a hollowness inside him, like hunger or
the deprivation from some addictive substance. This feeling was certainly a
result of changes the virus was making to his body—changes he needed to learn
more about. Now, in this breathing space, he called up a file he had
discovered earlier in his father’s diverse collection. It dated back to near
the end of the war when the Prador had been employing their drones and
adolescents, but most importantly armies of blanks, in ground assaults against
Polity worlds. Vrell had been very interested to learn that there had been
other Prador infected with the virus before him. He began now to scan through
the story of their catastrophic return to the Second Kingdom.

* * * *

As he stood with Captain Ron and the other Hoopers, Janer surveyed the
surrounding crowd, trying to ignore the occasional waft of decay that reached
his nostrils. It was a convention of the living dead, and even though he had
now been here for many days, he still could not get used to them.

At the forefront of the crowd, arrayed in neat ranks, were Bloc’s Kladites,
all in grey, their helmets and masks tucked under their arms, laser carbines

slung across their backs.

Here, around him, were the other reifs. Some were clad in a mixture of
fashions, as if their deaths had also frozen time for them at that point. The
rest wore utile garments similar to those worn by Keech when Janer first met
him, but not necessarily in boring shades of grey. Few of them displayed death
wounds, as did Taylor Bloc up there on the platform, or Aesop, though some
bore signs of tissue repair, or covering patches which were often ornamented.
Many more were just the usual shrivelled individuals, and Janer supposed that
what had killed them was either invisibly repaired or now concealed by their
baroque clothing, if concealed at all. There were many routes to death that
caused no visible damage to the body.

Janer returned his attention to the platform. Bloc had been going on for
twenty minutes now and, after the preamble about this ‘age of the Arisen’ and
the ‘flame carried down the years’, Janer had tuned him out. Aesop and Bones
lurked in the background, hooded like sinister priests, and yet more Kladites
stood to either side, surveying the crowd suspiciously.

‘This reif is a world-class bore,’ said Ron ruminatively. ‘What’s all that
business with the bottle?’

‘To launch the ship, they smash it against the hull,’ Janer explained.

‘Seems a criminal waste to me,’ Ron opined.

Janer swung his attention to Forlam, who stood at Ron’s side. The man looked
not so much bored as quiescent, as if waiting for an opportunity to exercise
his rather unhealthy inclinations. Wade stood with his arms folded and a look
of tired patience, so again Janer had to remind himself that this was
emulation, not some unconscious attitude on the Golem’s part, and certainly no
indication of what was going on in his mind. He turned back to Ron.

‘She is certainly impressive. I suppose it would be stupid of me to ask if
you’ll be able to handle her?’

‘Ship that big,’ said Ron, ‘you’ve just got to know how quickly you can stop
it or turn it. And never forget how little it is, compared to the ocean, and
how fragile compared to some rocks in that ocean.’

Janer nodded. Yes, the ship was huge and wonderfully complete, with its long
blue and black hull, hundreds of square chainglass windows, its tiered decks

and many other structures up there, and the forest of masts and spars above
them. Things seemed quite complicated in the rigging, and he wondered how the
sails would cope. Having asked, he now knew that they would not be hanging
upside down, batlike, as was their custom. Nor would they be using plain
muscle power to change the angle of the other fabric sails, for even they were
not that strong. They would turn themselves to the wind as instructed by the
helmsman, Forlam apparently, but this movement would be transferred via
sensors to the relevant mast and spar motors, and cable winders. Much of their
other work up there—reefing fabric sails and rigging changes—they would
control through consoles mounted on the masts. There was still much for them
to learn. Perhaps foremost was working with their fellows, as never before had
there been more than one living sail to a ship.

‘Ah, at last,’ muttered Isis Wade, ‘the outflow of verbal effluent comes to an
end.’

‘. . . so now, without any more ado, I name this ship,’ Bloc announced, ‘the
Sable Keech!’

He pulled down a lever on the framework. An arm, which until then had been
concealed, arced up with the bottle attached to the end, and smashed it
against the hull. Immediately the grumbling of motors set up a vibration in
the air, and the Sable Keech began to move down to the water. Peering through
the crowd, Janer observed the treaded pallets running smoothly under its huge
weight. As its bows touched the sea, the Hoopers all cheered, then the
reifications followed suit, but that seemed to be just noise with no feeling
in it. The cheers died away as the ship continued its slow progress into the
waves. Soon it revealed behind it the alloy ramp, dented with the marks of
pallet treads. It trailed cables being wound out from motorized reels on the
deck to shore anchors. Each of the reels was manned by a skeletal Golem. Once
it was fully in the water, one of these reels began winding in, pulling taut
the cable to Janer’s left, drawing the bows round to a predetermined position,
whereupon another Golem aboard dropped an anchor. The ship turned, the stern
swinging out until the vessel drew parallel to the coast. More anchors slid
down. Now, the motorized pallets returned from the sea, and to Janer’s
surprise the ramp began to rise. It drew level, creating a jetty protruding a
hundred metres out over the waves, supported underneath by rams. The end of
this was only a few tens of metres from the ship itself.

‘Neat,’ he said.

‘Golem know how to build,’ said Wade.

‘They had good teachers,’ Janer shot back.

‘You mean the AIs?’

Janer grimaced at that and made no further comment.

The Golem were now manipulating both anchor chains and shore cables to draw
the ship closer to the jetty. An upper section of hull hinged out, and down,
drawing a wide collapsible stair out from under the main deck and down to the
jetty. It moved with the roll of the sea for a moment, until clamps folded up
from underneath the jetty and crunched it into place. What struck Janer here
was the strange combination of the anachronistic and new: a sailing ship but
all this technology as well. He wondered what other Polity technologies,
besides that submersible, might be aboard, then he watched as the army of
Golem began to disembark.

‘Here’s the new toy we’ve built for you,’ he said.

‘Quite,’ said Wade.

Janer turned to Ron, as Bloc began speaking again. ‘I guess we should go get
our stuff.’

‘Why not,’ said Captain Ron, looking at Wade thoughtfully.

* * * *

Wormish tangles of packetworm coral rose in the sea like three Hindu temples,
beaches of grey sand accumulated around them. Ambel scanned their destination
through his binoculars, and grimaced as he noted the mounded shape of a leech
washed up on the shore. It was unmoving so was probably dead. Leeches, which
sat at the top of the food chain here, were surprisingly more mortal than
everything below them in that chain. The sprine they used in their digestive
system tended to percolate through their bodies, negating the growth of the
viral fibres.

‘Must be fairly recent.’ Boris nodded towards the huge corpse. He was holding
the helm with one hand and contemplatively flexing the fingers of his other
hand. Ambel lowered his binoculars and eyed the man. Stitching the fingers
back on had not been such a problem, but reattaching the tendons that had
snapped back up into his arm had been messy and painful.

‘We’re not going to have any problems are we?’ Ambel asked.

Boris shrugged. ‘It was an accident.’

‘Then take us in.’

Boris turned the helm to bring the Treader round, then he shouted, ‘You awake
up there?’

Galegrabber hurriedly turned himself, and the sails he controlled, to catch
the best of the wind to bring the ship in towards the grey beach. Ambel
glanced down to the deck to make sure someone was ready to drop the anchor,
then returned the binoculars to his eyes.

It was a recent death. The leech’s rider prill were milling about just beyond
it, not yet aware that their ride was dead and so might now have made the
transformation into dinner, and no other creatures had yet arrived to join in
the potential feast.

‘Might be a bit risky,’ said Boris.

‘But there’s something to gain.’ Ambel lowered his binoculars. ‘You get that
deck cannon loaded.’

They changed position and Boris kicked open the ammunition box situated below
the swivel-mounted cannon. He took out a paper-wrapped charge and shoved it
down the barrel, ram-rodded it down, followed by wadding then a pack of
stones. Then he pierced through the ignition hole and primed the flash pan.

‘Anne, up here!’ Ambel called. In a moment she came up from the deck, where
she had been readying the rakes and riddles used to harvest amberclams. ‘Take
the helm,’ Ambel told her, ‘I need to ready my ‘buss.’ As she took the helm he
scrambled down the ladder to the deck, unhooked his enormous blunderbuss from
the forecabin wall, and prepared it in much the same way Boris had prepared
the deck cannon. Both weapons were equally effective, but only Ambel was
strong enough to hold the blunderbuss and aim it properly.

‘Juniors below!’ he ordered as at the last moment the Treader came about, the
sail reefing both fabric sails and itself, and climbing high up the mast, out
of reach. The ship drew up sideways against a bank of sand, next to which the
water was still deep. Sild dropped anchor then hurried off to find his musket.

Peck swiftly freed his shotgun from its wrapping of oily cloth, fed some
shells into it, then pumped one into the chamber. Already the prill had
spotted the ship and were running across the sand in their curious revolving
manner, leaving spiral trails behind them.

‘I said juniors below,’ said Ambel.

Sprout hung his head and, trailing his machete behind him, slowly followed the
other junior crew. Ambel hoped Sprout would soon understand juniors do not
heal as quickly as older Hoopers, and this was the only reason Ambel sent him
below on such occasions.

‘And leave your machete—I’ll be needing it.’

Anne tied off the helm, then half scrambled and leapt down to the deck. In a
moment she had reached the rail, taken a case from one of the lockers, and out
of it her laser carbine.

‘Save your shots,’ Ambel warned. ‘You’ve only got one more energy canister for
that.’

Anne nodded just as Boris fired the deck cannon.

The leading prill fragmented in a great gout of sand, broken carapace and
detached sickle legs. Ambel fired too and blew more of them to pieces, then
hurriedly reloaded. Sild fired once, splitting one prill into two halves,
which flipped over backwards with legs wriggling in the air. Anne picked off
the ones closest to the ship with brief pulsed shots that caused them to leap
in the air, trailing steam from the holes burnt through them. Then the
remaining creatures hit the side of the ship with a sound like hail on a
wooden board. Ambel and Boris fired yet again, simultaneously, fragmenting
more of the creatures below. In a second one of them was up on the rail, red
eyes shooting around its rim like some nightmare music centre. Sild smashed it
away with his musket butt, but more of them swarmed over. Anne calmly replaced
her carbine in its box, picked up Sprout’s machete, then began laying about
herself, chopping the creatures to pieces. Peck continued blasting them as
they came over the rail then, having emptied his shotgun, he reversed it to
use as a club. As always, using his fists and boots, Ambel turned the
surrounding deck into a shellfish bouillabaisse minus the vegetables. Boris
was soon down with him and joining in. The last prill over the rail he caught
under his hobnail boot, then pressed his full weight down, crushing its shell.

‘Juniors up!’ Ambel bellowed. He walked over to Anne and held out his hand for
the machete. With a quizzical look she passed it to him. ‘You take Sild and

the rest of the lads and get all the amberclams you can.’

‘And you?’ she asked.

‘Peck can guard my back,’ he slapped the gory blade against his gory hand.
‘I’m gonna get me the best part of a leech.’

* * * *

Erlin gazed down at the island, and it seemed a perfect agate in the pale
green ocean, but for one flaw near its edge. This flaw had obviously been
scraped out and repositioned just offshore. As Zephyr began to spiral down
through cold dispersed cloud, her view became clearer, and she realized she
was seeing an enormous ship. Ah, so a piece of the island had been scraped out
and beaten into a ship mould to produce this. You’d think it would sink being
made of all that stone and mud . . .

On some level Erlin knew she was not thinking in any logical manner. The craft
rising from the island she recognized as a planetary shuttle, but also thought
it a huge fly rising from the island’s wound. She wondered if the ground had
bled, or if the island had squealed when that big leech, now resting offshore,
had bitten from it such a huge bloody lump of its flesh.

‘There the Golem leave to serve out the rest of their indenture to Cybercorp
elsewhere. Perhaps some of them, in time, will wear bodies like mine. I envy
them such choices,’ said Zephyr.

Bodies . . . lump of flesh . . . blood . . .

Before she knew what she was doing, Erlin was trying to claw at the creature
above her. She was suddenly so very hungry. Then abruptly she saw her extruded
tongue waving before her face and some sanity returned. She gaped at her
broken fingernails and vaguely recollected that she had attacked the sail
before. Then she stared at her dark blue fingers, mesmerized.

‘What we going to do when we get down there?’ asked one of the other two
sails. ‘We can’t let her loose like this. Things might get a bit. . . hectic.’

‘Arrangements have been made,’ Zephyr replied.

* * * *

Gazing down at the planet through satellite eyes, the Warden observed Erlin’s
arrival at Mortuary Island, and though the AI had not interfered, it felt some
shedding of responsibility. Then, gazing through many other eyes at ground
level, it felt frustration. The Golem agent of the ancient hive mind was
practically untraceable now. In the time frame posited, thousands of Golem had
arrived and departed, including the indentured ones who had built the Sable
Keech. This was worrying, for no one could be sure what the hive mind’s
motives or intentions might be.

That hive mind, being old and nigh incomprehensible, did not have much
official contact with humans and AIs, though through its own kind it did have
some converse with those skirting the edge of the Polity and its laws—humans,
aliens and AIs. Through them it must have gained access to the technology
enabling it to accelerate its thought processes beyond pheromonal transfer,
and to send out its eyes and agents beyond Earth. It was supposed that, like
the younger mind before it, it was here after the formula for sprine, but that
was dubious. Some claimed that a breed of hornets carrying sprine in their
stings would counterbalance the strength and nigh indestructibility of
Hoopers, and that Polity AIs were not averse to this. It was a myth, which,
foolishly unchecked, led one young hive mind (a mere ten thousand years of
age) to attempt colonization here with adapted hornets. Had it succeeded, the
Warden’s drones would then have been busy with canisters of insecticide until
every last hornet here was dead.

The Polity contained many other individuals potentially as dangerous as
Hoopers: free Golem, augmented humans, dracomen and the ineffable Dragon that
was their source, and various other aliens. Moreover, just the existence of
sprine acted as a counterbalance. Of course Polity AIs had long ago analysed
that substance and could easily manufacture it. The Warden knew that one
runcible jump away lay a stock of weapons that employed it. A rail-gun firing
sprine-tipped darts would certainly be more effective than any hornet, and
that was just the least of the weapons available. The young mind’s claim to be
seeking personal armament for defence, just like any other Polity citizen was
allowed, was rather weak when individual hornets comprised only a minuscule
fraction of it. Hornets with killing stings could not be allowed, especially
since they could inadvertently wipe out the limited population of an alien
race, the sails, who owed their incredibly long life spans to the virus inside
them. Surely the ancient mind knew this, which again begged the question, why
was it here?

The Warden turned its attention to files that one of its subminds had hunted
down from all quarters of the Polity, and began to examine them. The hive
mind, though incommunicative to Polity AIs, was very active and constantly
monitored. Its eyes—carried by some indentured to that same mind but mostly by
those it employed, now the indenture periods were so reduced (perpetually
increasing hornet populations of each hive mind resulted in a reduction of the
sentence for killing one hornet)—had been to many locations. It travelled to
Hive, to most of the planets and stations in the Sol system and, seemingly at

random, to other planets across the Polity. But then other hive minds operated
in the same fashion: they were looking around, ever curious. Also, like other
minds, it searched regularly for information on the nets. And by studying what
the mind searched for, the Warden began to see a pattern emerge.

In the beginning the mind had studied the various religions of Earth, paying
particular attention to the concept of afterlife those primitive ideologies
espoused. It then moved on to a brief spell of investigating the mind-wiping
or execution of murderers, swiftly followed by a detour into memcording. At
precisely that time, the Warden noted, it had sent its agents to Klader and,
both through them and the nets, studied the changing organization of the
reifications. It also looked into the history of human medical technologies,
paying particular attention to the time when it first became possible for
people to live forever. Noting the direction of the mind’s interest, the
Warden realized the mind’s physical explorations were anything but random. Its
agents visited war graves, the pyramids, the sites of ancient concentration
camps, the Solar System battlefields of corporate wars, the planet Samarkand,
and planets denuded of life during the Prador War. Its agents purchased for it
numerous items with one constant theme: a crystal Aztec skull, reproductions
of medieval art, antique weapons, gravestones, funeral urns . .. the list even
included a dinosaur skeleton. So, given its ghoulish interests, Spatterjay
should most certainly be high on its list of places to visit. But this was not
exactly what worried some Polity AIs.

The mind had studied Spatterjay, and around about the same time there had been
a successful raid on an ECS information repository. This unlinked storage
system contained, amongst much else, the deciphered genetic codes for numerous
Spatterjay life forms. This occurred while the hive mind relocated to Hive and
purchased equipment from human genetic engineers there. The AIs were
immediately suspicious, but could not prove the mind responsible for the
information raid. But they watched very closely thereafter, and began really
to worry when warned, by the younger hive mind, that the old hive mind was
sending a Golem agent to Spatterjay. The Warden returned its attention to the
base on the Island of Chel. Still no trace of the Golem, and only one hivelink
had been operating through the runcible, though one not connected to the old
hive mind. But the Golem was here, and its guiding hive mind was very very
interested in death.

* * * *

Janer dumped his backpack on the floor and surveyed his cabin. He had expected
it to be cramped, but on reflection a ship a kilometre long should have room
to spare. It contained a desk against one wall with a screen above it and a
swivel chair before it. At the foot of the fold-down bed running along the
opposite wall a partitioned area held a washbasin and toilet. The tap he found
only ran when he put his hands directly underneath it, and he soon discovered
it would not operate if he placed some other item in the way of its sensor.
There were cupboards, light panels in the ceiling, a small area supplied with
a microwave cooker which also supplied boiling water for hot drinks. But most
importantly, this cabin was on the side of the corridor adjoining the hull, so
he had the benefit of one of the metre-square chainglass windows, before which
rested two form chairs on either side of a coffee table.

He was quite happy with all this, but what aroused in him some suspicions was
the bottle of hornet syrup in the cupboard, and the fact that his name was
already carved into the door.

This set of crew quarters lay to the stern of the ship on A Deck, whilst there
was another one in the bows. Separate quarters were necessary simply because
of the sheer length of the Sable Keech. Hoopers working at the bows would not
take kindly to having to walk the best part of a kilometre to work each shift.
There was a galley and a mess at the end of the corridor outside, and a food
store beyond that. The reification staterooms were located on Deck B, a level
below. While exploring with Ron and Forlam, Janer had seen how different these
were: without toilets and with flat unpadded bunks—no doubt for them to take
the weight off their servomotors but certainly not for sleep. There was also
no refectory down there, no storage for food, no need for either. He had later
learnt that such spartan conditions were misleading, as each reification
stateroom could be swiftly converted to house living humans, which their
current occupants hoped one day to become. Restaurants, shops and bars—at
present mostly closed—in the third tier of the central deckhouse, and on all
three tiers of the stern deckhouse, were there to cater to their needs on the
return journey.

Sitting on his bunk, Janer dragged his backpack up beside him, pulled out all
his spare clothing, then the short hexagonal stasis case. He pressed his
fingertip into an indentation, whereupon the case split in half longitudinally
and silently hinged open. He eyed the ten small cylinders arranged inside,
with their tubes connecting to the transparent reservoir. Each time a hornet
died, he would open this and release another one—just revived. There were none
presently in the reservoir. He now took the diamond stud of his hivelink out
of his pocket and fixed it in his earlobe. This device was only a relay to the
implant in the bone behind his ear. By removing this earring he broke the
connection between that implant and the transceiver inside the case. The
hornets were also linked to the case, which in turn was U-space-linked through
the runcible on Coram back to the mind on Hive. He heard nothing, not even a
buzzing to signify that the link was operating.

Janer ruminated. Something could have gone wrong, but in all his years
communicating through the hivelink, Janer had never known that to happen. It
was odd, just as it was odd that the two hornets had died simultaneously. They
were always of different ages so as to prevent this, so the hive mind could
have an unbroken view through at least one of them. Perhaps something else had
occurred: some attack on the hive mind’s communication system, and on its
hornets? Janer grimaced, loath to jump to conclusions, but definitely
suspicious of one individual in particular. He closed the case then removed
another item from his pack and studied it warily, wondering how he would know
when to use it now.

The gun looked little different from a regular gas-system pulse gun. In fact
it did fire pulses of ionized gas, but it was also something more. Its
appearance was a façade, but would never have fooled a runcible AI, which was

why Janer had come here aboard the Gurnard. The older hive mind’s agent was a
Golem, so would be very difficult to stop. An APW would do the job, but only
one above a certain energy level, but such weapons were usually bulky carbines
or larger, and therefore difficult to conceal. This one he could conceal,
however, and with it he could prevent that agent from acquiring sprine. It was
a weapon for the assassination of a Golem. Unfortunately that Golem seemed
likely to be Isis Wade—and Janer rather liked him.

* * * *

The trench was deep here, its bottom four kilometres below the ocean’s
surface, and hundreds of kilometres from where Ebulan had originally hidden
this spaceship. Scanning outside with sonar and an infrasound sampler, Vrell
ascertained that the cliff rearing beside the vessel was loaded with weed and
drifts of silt caught on ledges, but that there seemed no dangerous faults in
the underlying stone. Selecting one of the underwater turbines he revolved it
until it was pointing up at the cliff, then turned it on. This only succeeded
in pushing the ship harder against the bottom for a while, then the stream of
water hit the cliff, and clouds of silt, weed, shell and other detritus began
to boil out and avalanche down. He listened carefully to the sound of rocks,
larger shells and other odd unidentifiable objects impacting against the upper
hull, and was reminded of the time he had to bury himself in the ground to
escape the rampaging Captain Drum. He felt a sudden anger and nearly shut off
the thruster. Why should he hide? Why should he be afraid? He could tear them
apart. But he got himself back under control, and only shut off the stream of
water when the silt was metres deep and beginning to impinge on the function
of outside scanners and cameras. When he was ready he would fight, but not
until then.

Heaving himself back up onto his legs, Vrell flexed his new pair of back
limbs, which had unaccountably replaced those that had, on the island, dropped
away to expose his sexual organs. These new legs were still soft, and not yet
long enough to reach the ground. Did this mean he was an adolescent again? He
wasn’t quite sure what it meant. No matter. He would set his blanks to work,
then return to studying the account concerning the virus-infected Prador.

The pilot he programmed to repair gravmotors, and the navigator he set to
dealing with the various generators and transformers. He set them to replacing
coils and components with those kept in storage, or manufacturing new
components in the ship’s machine shop. Setting them these tasks was not too
onerous, as Ebulan had stored many thrall subprograms for this very purpose.
Vrell also designated the two headless blanks to assist where they could;
usually just to fetch and carry and help lift heavy items. The other blank he
decided he would make dispensable, and with the quadruped robots set it to
work on the ship’s fusion plants. One of those was operating so needed no
attention, two required realigning and restarting, others were severely
damaged and radioactive. Vrell doubted this last blank would survive this to
repair them all. Then, setting alarms to alert him should the blanks encounter
anything their programs did not encompass, Vrell returned to the story.

The ship, a huge exotic metal destroyer, had returned to the home system, but
was ordered to take up orbit around one of the furthest cold planets and there
await inspection. The council of Prador leaders, who governed the Second
Kingdom, had communicated with the adult Prador aboard, but remained wary.

The report they received from the ship did not tie in with what Prador spies
gleaned of the action in which it had been recently involved. Two ships had
been sent to drop from U-space outside a Polity system and run in at fast
sublight speeds firing antimatter missiles to intersect the course of a
defence planetoid. This had all gone according to plan, and the planetoid
blown to glowing dust that spread in a ring around the sun. The moon’s
defences had been weak, the reason for this becoming evident when the orbital
sun lasers of the system’s real defensive weapons began firing. Both ships
escaped. However, this returned ship’s report claimed that the lasers had
managed to destroy the other ship. Either the spies or the Captain of this
surviving ship had been lying.

The order to stand off and wait was disobeyed and the ship in question dropped
into U-space, managing an incredibly accurate jump into the orbit of the home
world. Immediately, heavy destroyers were ordered to intercept, but not
managing so accurate a U-space jump, arrived thousands of kilometres away from
the planet. They also could not fire on the ship for fear of causing damage to
the groundside population.

Planetary defences opened up and the ship took a terrible battering as it
descended into the sea fifty kilometres off the King’s island. The then King,
an ancient Prador who had ruled the Second Kingdom unassailably by keeping his
council members squabbling with each other, ordered in every available force
to defend him. The sea was depth-charged continuously for a month, then a
hundred of the early-style Prador drones called in, too. The battle that
followed Vrell was able to observe from recordings recovered from those drones
lucky to survive. He saw some weirdly shaped Prador, black as night, ascending
from the deeps where few should have survived the depth-charging. He
recognized many similarities in these to himself now. Many were badly
shattered by drone weapons, but they did not die easily and fought back hard,
destroying the King’s drones one after the other. They carried the regular
Prador weapons, but also ones they had modified, advanced, made more powerful.

Eventually fifty of them gained the shore, clustering about a huge one of
their own kind—the size of an adult but hollow of carapace and retaining its
full complement of legs as in childhood. Its head jutting forward moved
independently of its body on a corded neck. Ashore they faced a force of five
thousand adolescents, including armoured drones, some on the ground and some
in the air. The battle should have been brief, but it dragged on as these
strange new Prador rebels employed energy defence fields and even managed to
survive tactical atomic blasts. As they advanced, the King retreated with a
personal guard of his own adolescents, giving also the order for the
withdrawal to his other forces. But their retreat only allowed the new Prador
to more quickly advance. The King finally ordered a massive CTD strike,
thereby sacrificing thousands of his own fighters.

What happened next became increasingly unclear to Vrell, as it was difficult
to separate truth from propaganda. The island was scoured to the
bedrock—nothing remaining of the attacking Prador. The King, out at sea, was
deposed by an aggressive faction of his council. All his adolescents were
slaughtered, and he himself was apparently injected with a slow-working
diatomic acid and floated out above the sea on his own AG so other Prador
could watch him die screeching and bubbling. A new King grabbed power, called
Oboron, a name unfamiliar amid the previous factional infighting of the
council. And so the time of the Third Kingdom began.

This stuff was all utterly new to Vrell. He had known how the present King had
scrabbled to power over the burnt-out carapaces of his predecessor and that
King’s supporters, but nothing about any attack by virally mutated Prador.
Delving deeper, he discovered that the returned ship had been the first to
carry human blanks imported from Spatterjay, and read Ebulan’s speculations
about experiments, using the Spatterjay virus, being conducted aboard. He
scanned a brief report of some discovered wreckage being identified as that of
the missing ship used in the attack on the Polity, and supposed the chief
Prador aboard it had discovered what was happening aboard its companion
vessel, leading to a dispute in which the mutated Prador decided to act
preemptively. Nowhere could he find the name of the Prador Captain of the
returned ship. And Vrell reflected on how the Third Kingdom had survived for
so long, guarded by Oboron’s ruthless army of adolescents constantly encased
in layers of concealing armour, and how the same king had remained in power
for some seven hundred years, unseen.

After scanning all the records, Vrell ruminated over everything he now knew.
Aggression warred with intellect inside him. He wanted away from this planet
so he could establish himself back in the Third Kingdom, but he would have to
be very careful and very clever in doing so. Though he knew his mind was now
functioning differently from that of most Prador—more intelligent and, if it
was possible, more ruthless—he was one against many, and should he make the
slightest error in his plans for his return, he would not survive the wrath of
his own kind ... all of his own kind.

* * * *

9

Amberclams:
these molluscs are one of the best-known of the many genera of burrowing
bivalves that live in the ocean floor, or in ‘cast’ sands. Their name stems
from the amber colour of their flesh, which is much relished by Hoopers.
Pickled amberclams are a staple of the Hooper diet, and the product ‘amber
sauce’ -made by allowing de-shelled clams to dissolve in seacane rum—is
greatly valued by them. It would be well to remember that this sauce is

poisonous to non-Hoopers, causing intoxication, hallucinations, convulsions
and sometimes even death. But perhaps the worst side-effect of this product on
Polity citizens is that, while hallucinating, they experience the overpowering
urge to take a swim—which is never a good idea on Spatterjay.

Perpetually growing larger, old clams slowly migrate down into the deep ocean
muds, where have been found specimens weighing many hundreds of tons. But for
viral infection, the amberclam life-cycle would be brief, and confined to the
sands washed from the worm casts of packetworms -

Janer walked down the corridor to the communal washroom, glanced inside and
saw it noticeably devoid of Hoopers or any sign that they had ever been there.
He had been surprised, when first coming to Spatterjay, that such an
apparently unwashed people smelt only of things they caught and handled, and
remembered a conversation with Erlin on that subject:

‘You’d think they would stink,’ he said, pulling his own shirt out of his
sticky armpits and wishing he himself could wash. But they were returning from
the Skinner’s Island, fresh water supplies were limited, and even sea water
clear of visible life could contain a plankton that started eating one’s skin.

‘That’s not through any conscious effort on their part,’ she informed him
dryly.

‘No?’

‘No, the Spatterjay virus immunizes them from the bacteria that cause body
odour. It also kills many other parasites to which humans are prone, and even
some bacteria normal humans need.’

‘Like?’

‘Intestinal flora. They may look like us, but how they function inside has
changed a great deal,’ she explained.

‘But you’re a Hooper in that respect, and I’m on the way to becoming one.’

‘Mmm ... quite.’ Erlin seemed annoyed by the observation. ‘Perhaps I’m just

thinking more of the Old Captains.’ She peered back down the deck, towards
where Ambel and Captain Ron were deep in conversation.

She went on to tell him at length how Old
containing sufficient moisture, how their
changed, how they digested food; and how,
seemed to have over-indulged in beetroot.
changes in himself, but he still liked to

Captains did not sweat, probably not
kidneys shrank and their livers
by the colour of their urine, they
Now Janer was seeing signs of these
wash. Habit probably.

He showered, used the built-in hot air blast to dry himself, then donned clean
clothes: tough monofabric combat trousers, a blue silk shirt, and boots from
an envirosuit. His jacket was of vat-grown leather, with an inner layer of
ceramal mesh and a temperature-controlled lining run from a power pack the
size of a coin which in turn was kept recharged by a gridwork of solar cells
across his upper back and shoulders. After putting this on he slid his gun
into an inside pocket. He now felt ready, and was anxious for this strange
voyage to begin.

Janer stepped out to the sound of Hooper voices echoing down the corridor and
numerous other sounds probably from the mechanisms of the ship itself. Turning
to head for the nearest stair, which spiralled up around the lower internal
section of Mizzenmast Two outside the forward bulkhead of the crew quarters,
he passed the cabin door next to his own, then halted and backed up. There was
a name carved into this other door too—one he had missed. He was just
contemplating this when Aesop found him.

‘Bloc requires you ashore.’ The reif passed him a plasmel box. ‘Here.’

‘What does he want me for?’ Janer eyed the sidearm the reif wore.

Aesop gestured to the box. Janer opened it and studied the contents: some
bottles of the supplements Hoopers now often used to stave off the
transformation the virus could cause, a hollow-core laser injector—the only
kind that could penetrate Hooper skin—and cartridges of Intertox inhibitors to
load into it. He looked at Aesop questioningly.

‘Come,’ said the reif, not elaborating.

Aesop led him through the bulkhead to the stair he had been heading for
anyway, then up and out of the stairwell below the mizzen, and onto the main
deck. Janer looked around.

Each one of the nine masts penetrated right down into the ship’s bilge, and
each of them was wound around with a spiral stair, though these ended at the
maintenance deck, three decks below. This particular mast stair lay between
the rear two deckhouses: a large one positioned amidships and a smaller one
stretching back from here. In the latter deckhouse he had earlier seen
automated restaurants, bars and shops, and others that would eventually be run
by many of the Hoopers now aboard. Only glimpsing into the midship deckhouse,
he had seen rows of chainglass tanks, like aquaria, and racks of medical
equipment. Apparently the first two tiers were totally taken up by these, the
third tier containing more catering facilities.

From the forward deckhouse jutted a raised bridge. The cabins and staterooms
underneath were to be occupied by Bloc and his lieutenants, and also by
Captain Ron and his command crew. Up in the bridge, behind enclosing
chainglass, he could just see some people moving about, though from where he
stood they must be about seven hundred metres away. He supposed Ron, Forlam
and other Hoopers must be checking out their command, and trying out the
controls, for he could hear movement from the laser turrets positioned on the
hull below the rails. Positioning lasers there was only a sensible precaution.
There were some nasty creatures here quite capable of scaling the side of a
ship.

Just ahead of him, by Mizzen One, extending up the side of it from the midship
deckhouse, rose a crane, positioned over the movable section of main deck
between that deckhouse and the stern one. Above him was a forest of rigging in
which some Hoopers were either working or just climbing for the hell of it;
reefed monofabric sails, control cables and electric winders to drive them;
solar panels, mast-mounted consoles and the places ready to be occupied by the
living sails.

Aesop led him through a milling crowd of reifications, past Hoopers wandering
around bemusedly, and groups of watchful Kladites. They traversed the wide
area of deck beside the Tank Rooms, passed midchain anchor points, where Janer
peered down the length of the three ceramal chains reaching down into the sea,
and finally reached the embarkation stair. Two Kladites stood below, armed
with laser carbines, watching out for hostile life forms, since already some
frog whelks had tried to board the ship.

Janer’s admiration for the Golem builders was tempered by the fact that they
had neglected to put up some kind of fence along the jetty’s edges. Just then,
shadows drew across him, and he glanced up to see two living sails gliding in
to land up in the rigging. Then transferring his attention ashore, he saw, on
the beach, Bloc, a group of his Kladites and Bones, all standing beside some
large metallic object. Halfway down the ramp and he saw the metallic object
move, and realized it was a sail holding something flat to the beach with one
talon. That something was struggling, and after a moment he realized it was
human; and that what he could see of its skin was very blue.

Returning his attention to the one holding it, he said, ‘That is a very
odd-looking sail.’

‘Golem,’ Aesop replied briefly.

Janer noted that the reif’s head was moving back and forth, scanning the
island as if worried about something there, though it was difficult to be
sure, what with Aesop’s lack of expression and a distracting lump missing from
his head.

The beach consisted of polished quartz pebbles lying in drifts on pale grey
sand, seeming like something tipped out of a giant lapidary drum. As he
approached the group gathered around the Golem sail and its captive, Janer
pulled out the hollow-laser injector and clicked a cartridge of Intertox into
it. Obviously here was someone undergoing the viral transformation which, if
left unchecked, might result in something nasty.

‘We have one more passenger,’ said Bloc, turning towards him. ‘One even more
important than yourself.’

Janer did not like this obsequious and oblique compliment. His distrust of
Bloc was growing on every contact with him. Bloc walked beside him as he
stepped over to the sail. The great Golem turned and fixed him in its emerald
regard, then simply bowed its head to indicate its prize with its snout. The
sail was holding a woman face down with some sort of handle jutting up from a
harness she wore. From this Janer surmised the creature had been carrying her.
She was struggling and grunting with effort to escape. Only when he stooped
down to pull back her collar did recognition dawn. He set the dosage at its
highest, and placed the injector against her neck. It burned a pinhole deep
into her flesh and squirted a stream of Intertox into her as she continued
struggling. His mind running scenarios and discarding them one after another,
Janer stood and turned to face Bloc. He knew Erlin would never have risked any
journey so unprepared as to end up in this state. But would it be a good idea
to voice his suspicions right now?

‘I’ll give her another shot in about an hour or so,’ he said, ‘but we need to
get some supplements inside her.’

‘You can do that aboard the ship. We have restraints there for anyone
undergoing cybermotor nerve conflict as they Arise.’ Bloc’s spectacle
irrigator sprayed his eyes.

‘I see.’ Janer remembered how he and Erlin had ministered to Sable Keech when,
as a reification, he had arrived stinking, half-decayed and half-alive on the
deck of Ron’s sailing ship, the Ahab. Keech’s convulsions, shortly after he
had returned to life, had been the result of cybermotor nerve conflict. It was

because of this that Bloc wanted himself and Erlin along. This was the reason
for all the chainglass tanks aboard. This was the entire purpose of the
voyage. He was not here for a celebrity’s free ride; he was here to work. He
wondered, judging by her condition, how willing a volunteer was Erlin.

Bloc gestured in turn to a couple of Kladites. ‘You two take her to the ship.’
He turned back to the Golem sail. ‘Zephyr, release her now.’

Not thinking this a good idea at all, Janer stepped back. The sail released
the handle with which it had clamped Erlin to the ground, and shuffled out of
the way. Erlin paused before heaving herself to her feet.

‘Jaannersss!’ she hissed, her leech tongue waving about obscenely.
‘Lovelllies!’ She launched towards him, her hands open in blue claws. The two
Kladites tried to grab her, but she shrugged them off as if they were not
there. Bones stepped forward aiming a flat-nosed weapon. Janer flinched at the
first stun blast—and the one after it. Erlin dropped face down at his feet,
sighing into unconsciousness.

‘It is well to remember Hooper strength,’ said Bloc, irrigators again working
furiously.

Damned right, thought Janer.

* * * *

Huff’s memory of the time prior to his receiving severe injuries aboard
Captain Drum’s Cohorn was not so good. But the horrible occasion when he
actually received those injuries he remembered in lurid detail. Admittedly,
his memory would never have been so clear now without the assistance his
Polity aug gave his fibre-locked brain, but certainly he would never have
forgotten that time even without it. The memory of that mad woman Rebecca
Frisk boiling his head with a laser still made his eye sockets ache sometimes,
but going to see her confined in her tube at Olian’s was always a pleasant
remedy. A taste forever on his tongue was of the two human blanks whose heads
he had bitten off at the time he escaped and carried Captain Drum ashore to
hunt that Prador adolescent. The memory of Shib, the Batian mercenary,
stapling his neck to the mast elicited a psychosomatic choking. This last
memory was why Huff, surprisingly, felt happy now. Via his aug, he had learnt
of the recent events here on this island. And discovering that a number of
Batian mercenaries had been torn to pieces was cheering news indeed.

Growling contentedly to himself, Huff spread his wings and gripped the control
spars with his spur claws. Being this way up felt very strange, but was not

entirely unpleasant. He shifted his position and felt the assister motors
cutting in to move the spars above and below him, and on foremasts behind and
in front of him. Turning his head he checked the mast console and, onlining
the program in his aug, understood it perfectly: these controls to adjust
trim, reefing controls on a percentage scale so that he could put just as much
sail to the wind as he wanted, cable motors he could set to change the angle
of the other fabric sails in relation to himself—but all these controls within
parameters set by Zephyr, who would occupy the middle one of the three
mainmasts, controlling those ahead and behind him. Puff was towards the stern
of the ship, controlling the two mizzen-masts and the jigger mast.

However, still studying the console, Huff came across many terms unfamiliar to
him. He knew about course, gallant and top sails, but only through his aug did
he learn about skysails, moonrakers and staysails, and numerous terms for the
different kinds of rigging. He realized that this job would not be quite so
easy as he had supposed, and understood then something Windcheater had once
told him: ‘Technology means you work harder with your brain than you did with
your muscles, but the rewards can be greater.’

Huff agreed with the first part, but wondered when the second part might
materialize. However, his speculations were cut short when Zephyr arrived on
the central mainmast, his voice issuing from Huff’s mast console.

‘Now, we begin to learn,’ said the Golem sail.

* * * *

The quarter deck was crowded with reifications gazing back towards the island
as it retreated from view. Above them the hundreds of square metres of doubled
staysails cut up into the sky like blades and, forward, more sailswere opening
to the wind all the time, as if the ship were a closed flower brought out into
the sunshine. Many other reifs, John Styx knew, were, out of long habit, shy
of company and so would be watching through their cabin windows—those with
hull-side cabins that is, which on the whole had been occupied by Bloc’s
people. Others, he knew, had no interest at all in the voyage itself, and had
immediately interred themselves in their quarters, shutting themselves down
until it ended. It occurred to him that those on deck were evidently the ones
still with some appreciation of life, even though they were dead. He surveyed
the crowd, studied their varied dress, varied styles of reification, various
visible death wounds. It did not matter to him how accustomed he was getting
to the sight of dead people walking; this was still a macabre scene.

‘Aren’t we a grisly crew,’ said a female reif standing beside him. ‘And here
comes our grisly leader.’

Styx turned to her as she gestured with one tatty hand—flesh worn through to

the bone and replaced at the fingertips with rubbery pads. He inspected his
own wrinkled hand as if unsure of its provenance, then gazed at where she
indicated. Instantly recognizable in his long black coat, Taylor Bloc was
walking down beside the stern deckhouse towards them, Aesop and Bones trailing
along behind him as usual, but now with four armed Kladites behind them. As
soon as Bloc reached the edge of the crowd, some of its members approached
him. Out of this group stepped one individual who by the look of him had died
before attaining full growth. This dead youth, with stringy blond hair still
clinging to his scalp, wore clothing Styx recognized as being the fashion of
Klader a few hundred years in the past.

‘Bloc,’ began this reif, ‘we have some complaints.’

At this the others began to speak up too: ‘... damned inner cabin ...’ ’...
expect a reduction for . . .’ ‘I don’t see why it’s necessary for . . .’ They
all spoke in dead flat voices and kept on interrupting each other.

The ringleader held up his hand until the others fell silent. ‘As you can
hear, we are somewhat troubled by your treatment of us. We may be dead, but
you should know this does not give you the right to steal from us, or treat us
like your personal property.’

‘You’d think that death would be an adequate cure for whingeing, wouldn’t
you?’ the female reif murmured to Styx.

Styx tilted his head, and would have grinned if he could. ‘Perhaps it’s all
those years of having no one to complain to, and all those years of
independent existence.’ He pointed to the one who was now going into more
detail about the complaints of those hovering behind him. ‘Who is that?’

‘Ellanc Strone—recently reformed Kladites are always the angriest. And who
might you be?’

Styx held out his hand. ‘John Styx.’

After a hesitation she took his hand. ‘Santen Marcollian.’ She turned his hand
in hers and inspected it. ‘You recent?’

‘Relatively.’ He approximated a shrug. ‘And I use reconstructive cosmetics.’

She released his hand then stared at her own. ‘I considered that, but never
saw the point. I’m a corpse, why bother being a neat corpse?’

Now the crowd around Bloc and his crew continued with their litany of
complaints while Ellanc stood with his head bowed and his arms crossed. Had
the reif possessed the facility for expression, Styx supposed he would be
smiling now.

‘Enough!’ Bloc turned up his volume. He was now holding up his hands, which he
continued doing until the bitching around him dropped to an acceptable level.

‘Cabins were allocated at random. If any of you wish to move, then I suggest
you work out some arrangement with your fellows.’

‘Yeah, but I would have paid—’ began one of the complainers.

‘Please!’

Bloc’s eye irrigators seemed to have some sort of fault, Styx surmised. His
eyes surely did not need that much moisture.

Bloc continued, ‘I have given you this opportunity of resurrection, and you
complain?’ Despite the even tone issuing from his voice synthesizer, his
incredulity was evident. ‘We are reifications—’

‘Well screw you and your platitudes,’ Ellanc interrupted. ‘We’re not Kladites
following you on the promise of resurrection; we’re paying customers.’

Someone else interjected, ‘He’s right. We paid good money and we’ve been
conned and robbed ever since arriving here.’

Another said, ‘Yeah—five hundred shillings for a replacement joint motor.’

Yet another: ‘Last I heard, it’d be a short voyage from the Island of Chel.’

And the whole furore started up again.

‘Some definite hits,’ said Santen, ‘and some rather unfair criticism.’

‘They need to be rather careful,’ said Styx. ‘They seem to be forgetting that
they are no longer protected by Polity law.’

‘That could be a problem?’ she asked, looking at him.

‘Remember the hooder? Did you see any ECS monitors afterwards, any of the
Warden’s drones? Bloc’s Kladites are armed now, and they will enforce Bloc’s
law only.’

‘I guess that’s true.’

Styx continued relentlessly, ‘When you live in a society governed by
uncompromising law, it is a mistake often made to think you somehow carry it
with you when you step outside the safe confines of that society.’

Bloc turned up his volume again and bellowed for silence. When he finally got
it, he eyed the various rifts developing in the crowd.

‘Obviously there are some issues that need addressing,’ he continued, ignoring
a muttered ‘Fucking right’ from Ellanc.

He went on, ‘I will arrange some meetings so that you may present your
complaints in an orderly manner. You will be notified about them through your
cabin screens. Now, this is a ship upon which a crew needs to work, so your
presence on the decks does not help them. If you would all please return to
your cabins, you will duly be notified.’

But the crowd did not clear. The complaining started up again. Bloc retreated,
but they followed him across the quarter deck and down beside the stern
deckhouse. There, Aesop and Bones suddenly turned on them, while the four
Kladites shepherded Bloc away. Some pushing and shoving ensued, only to result
in Bloc’s two companions hurling Ellanc Strone and a couple of others to the
deck.

‘You should be careful,’ Aesop said evenly to the prostrate figures. ‘You

might accidentally have gone over the side, and then the weight of your
internal hardware would have taken you right down.’

None of the crowd subsequently tried to follow Bloc.

‘Thus it begins,’ said Styx.

* * * *

Sturmbul was certainly impressed with the enormous ship, but as a Hooper
nearing his three hundredth year he had not survived by trusting other
people’s workmanship, and as a shipwright himself, employed by Bloc, he had
wanted for many days to make a closer inspection of the vessel. On the day of
its launch he had watched the stair fold up into the side of the ship, and
that section of hull close after they brought that woman aboard. He then
wandered over to a Hooper who was standing idly by, watching the massive
midship anchor chains being hauled up

‘That chain ain’t greased,’ he observed.

The other Hooper turned to him. ‘The top few links are automatically sprayed
with Nilfrict as the anchor goes down and hits the bottom. All morning I’ve
been watching frog whelks scrabbling for a grip and falling off.’

‘They could come up with the rest of the chain,’ suggested Sturmbul.

The other Hooper just pointed, and Sturmbul went over for a closer inspection.
The chain was crashing up through a funnel-ended hole in the upper section of
hull, up through the deck over ceramal reels, around a motorized capstan, then
down into a chain locker. He watched a hammer whelk ascend gripping the chain
and go into that funnel. A wet squeaking squelch ensued, and as the chain
emerged up over the reels it was thick with ichor and broken shell.

‘Ah,’ said Sturmbul, turning to the other man. ‘What’s your job?’

‘Anchorman. Buggered if I know why. All they do is flick a touch panel up
there.’ He stabbed a thumb towards the bridge.

Sturmbul shrugged.

Over the ensuing day he encountered a lot of the same: Hoopers standing around
gazing with bemusement at all the machines doing their jobs for them. However,
the same did not apply to him. He spent time studying the plans on his cabin
screen, making occasional forays to check this or that. Half a day he spent
replacing some pulleys the Golem sail had ripped out of their fittings. Then
he took a further half-day reorganizing the machinery and spares on the
maintenance deck. But now he was finally free to look around.

Standing on the main deck, he looked up when shadows slid across the midship
deckhouse and he observed some fabric sails reefing with automated precision,
and the Golem sail on Mainmast Two turning its rig to the wind. For such a
huge vessel, this ship moved very smoothly. Sturmbul found it almost too
smooth, but understood the Sable Keech would not be tossed about much in seas
like these. He headed for the stairwell of Mizzen One.

The stair took him down ahead of the crew quarters, through a section that was
open with gantries either side. The decks below were similarly open down to
the bilge, to give access for the crane above. He departed the stair on B
Deck, strolling along a corridor between the reifications’ staterooms, and
could not help slowing his pace to peer in through an open door. Inside he
observed a dead woman swabbing her shrivelled breasts with a sponge soaked in
blue balm, felt slightly sickened by the sight and quickly moved on before she
spotted him. Then, encountering a squad of four armed Kladites marching down
the corridor, he stood aside and eyed them suspiciously.

Reaching the third mainmast, Sturmbul took the spiral stair down to the
maintenance deck. Here, he had been told, was stored every conceivable
component that might be required, barring an entire new ship, of course. He
sniffed the familiar smell of newly cut wood and glanced back through a wide
sliding bulkhead door, beyond which were stored stocks of planking, beams,
sheet bubble-metal, and some of the ship’s larger components, on either side
of a wide gangway supplied with rails and pallets for shifting those heavier
materials. Further beyond lay the open section through which larger items
could be craned up above. Ahead of him were machine shops where they could
make new items: cutting and shaping wood and metal into the most minuscule
item if necessary. He waved at Lumor and Joss, who were joyously shoving a
lump of wood into a robotic router and tapping things into the machine’s
console. The misshapen object coming out of the other end appeared utterly
useless, and it was obvious the two were playing around, but he thought it
better not to berate them just yet. He glimpsed, in partitioned booths, the
planers, lathes, mills and other machines less familiar to him as he moved on.

The next bulkheads, sectioning off the stair of Mainmast Two, led through to a
storeroom containing smaller items. Cages were filled with a shipwright’s
cornucopia; one was packed full of monofabric. Boxes contained metal and
wooden fixings; other items rested on long racks, all clearly labelled:
cablemotor mizzen staysail 1B, pulley—standard, cable clamp . . . the list
went on and on. Yet more racks contained components for the cabins: taps,

sinks, light panels and other electrical fittings. He moved past these, and
spotted Rymund standing before a cage containing a miscellany of bottles and
cans.

‘All right, Rymund?’

‘Just seeing what we got here, Sturm.’

Sturmbul glanced at the notescreen in Rymund’s hand. ‘And what we got?’

‘Seagourd resin, paints, greases and oils—all the usual—but we’ve got glues
that could stick a giant leech to the Big Flint, also solvents and acids and a
shitload of other stuff I’m still trying to figure. Here, wood metalizer—you
got a rotten beam all you do is soak it in this stuff and a few minutes later
it’s full of a steel fibre grid.’

‘You got a rotten beam,’ said Sturmbul huffily, ‘and you ain’t been doing your
job right.’

‘Just what it says here.’

Sturmbul snorted and moved on, entered the stair at Mainmast One, then at the
next bulkhead pressed his hand against the panel beside the heavy door, which
admitted him to a more secure area. He was allowed in here for inspection
purposes, but was immediately aware of the swivel-mounted camera with its
underslung laser. He eyed a locked cage containing QC hand lasers, some laser
carbines and energy canisters. Just what was left—the rest of the armoury the
Kladites carried constantly.

Other open cages about him contained reification spares and medical equipment,
and Sturmbul guessed they were stored here simply because there was space to
spare. He moved further on through, the camera tracking him. It was a standard
security camera: large enough to be seen and by its obvious presence prevent
wrongdoing.

The next door admitted him to an area containing two immense water tanks and a
desalination plant—the latter an upright cylinder made of brushed aluminium.
From this pipes punched down through the deck, some of them eventually opening
into the sea below. Other pipes connected to the water tanks, and a wider one
exited sideways through the hull. He had already seen this last pipe spewing
salt sludge waste as the plant filled the tanks with fresh water refined from
the sea. He listened hard for the sound of pumps, but heard none. This was

Polity technology: if it made any noise, that meant something was going wrong.

Rather than now go on to the less interesting chain lockers, Sturmbul climbed
down a ladder into the misnamed bilge. This area rose three decks in height,
with partial decks and enclosed areas scattered all around it. There were many
items and mechanisms here that he could only guess about. Fat cylindrical
bubble-metal shrouds he felt sure concealed Polity technology. Similar, though
larger, shrouds covered something far back in the stern, where in any other
ship the engines might be positioned. He guessed what lay hidden there was not
something Bloc or Lineworld Developments would want Windcheater to know about.
On a railed deck directly opposite him, he observed racks of laminar storage
batteries which connected to solar panels up in the rigging, and thereby fed
all the electrical systems of the ship. Along with them, also connected into
the system, were a couple of squat, sealed chrome cylinders. No one had told
him what these were for, but the fact that they required a pure water feed
from the desalination plant above led him to suspect they were fusion plants.
A section of the bilge, at midships, was utterly sealed off. He guessed that
was where they kept the submersible no one was supposed to know about. But
there were many other things here of which he knew nothing: many concealed
machines, hidden corridors, strange nooks and sealed compartments.

He stepped off the ladder and walked across the gratings, eyeing the lower
hull and the massive keel, confirming for himself that this place was
misnamed, for the bilge contained not a single drop of sea water. He moved
forward along aisles, checking corridors, finding his way to the hull wherever
he could and rapping it with his knuckles. Nearer the bows, below the chain
lockers, he almost got lost in the twists and turns, odd corridors, ladders
and different levels rising amid concealed machines. When he heard a sound of
chains, he wondered what had gone wrong. Why were they dropping the anchor
again? But the sound was not from the locker above, but nearby.

He turned towards it and died.

Eventually.

* * * *

The leech was coiled up like a giant slug poisoned by a huge slug pellet.
Captain Ambel inspected it while behind him Peck pumped a cartridge into his
shotgun’s breech and eyed the surrounding sea. Deep wounds had been burnt into
the creature’s front end—not injuries it might naturally have received in the
depths. The Captain walked down alongside the length of this hill of slimy
flesh, slapping the flat of the machete blade against his leg. When he reached
what he considered the correct position on its body, he stabbed the machete in
and drew it across for three metres, like opening a zip. The purple and yellow
lips of the cut everted under pressure from inside, but the spill of ichor was
thick and sluggish. He reached out and touched the raw flesh. It was cool. The
leech had been dead for at least a day. Nodding to himself, he chopped

downwards at one end of the long slash, and more inner flesh bulged out. When
he then sliced down from the other end, a great meaty flap peeled down and the
edge of the leech’s translucent intestinal sac bulged out, packed with
unidentifiable lumps. He sliced across this, and quickly stepped back as
dissolving chunks of heirodont flesh avalanched out, before being blocked by
something larger. The half-digested head of a small molly carp oozed into
view, tatters of translucent flesh clinging to its skull, its eyes gone and
the jagged teeth in its mouth revealed dripping and gleaming. Another hack,
and the carp slid out over the stinking mass and flopped over on the grey
sand.

‘Greedy bugger,’ Peck observed.

Ambel stepped around the mess and peered into the rapidly collapsing cavity.

‘Further back,’ he muttered, then cut open another three-metre flap. This time
the stuff that emerged was less easily identifiable. Certainly it included
undigested sections of glister shell and what looked like a load of rotten
apples, which it took him a moment to identify as probably a whole shoal of
boxies. The rest was just meat fibres, bones and dilute green bile.

‘Here we go!’

Ambel cut his way in, scooping aside the garbage with his machete, careful not
to get any of the bile on himself. Eventually he revealed a large baggy organ
the size and shape of a potato sack, fringed with wet combs of white flesh.
Pulling some string from his pocket he tied off the intestinal tube leading
from it to the main gut, cut that.. then cut around the organ until he could
pull it free. It dropped and slid out, and he dragged it down to the sea to
wash it off. There were boxies nosing about in the shallows, but the moment
spilled bile washed off the bile duct and clouded the water, they shot away.
Ambel could feel a slight tingling in his hands and a hollowness in his
stomach, of either hunger or nausea. This had happened to him before: the
slightest contact with leech bile—from which sprine could be refined—poisoning
some of the viral fibres in his body. It would not kill him, since only
swallowing the stuff could do that, though it could make him feel unwell.

‘A good un,’ he said, hauling the duct up out of the sea by its tied-off tube.
Then he noticed Peck peering into the slimy cavity, his expression puzzled.
Still carrying the duct, he walked up to stand beside the other man. ‘What’s
up?’

Peck gestured with his shotgun. ‘What’s that bugger?’

Lying in the base of the cavity was a segmented silver sphere the size of a
cricket ball. As they watched it opened out, like a pill-bug without legs,
began emitting a low hum and rose up into the air, turning so it pointed
towards Ambel and Peck. The two stepped back.

Peck aimed his shotgun, but Ambel reached out and pushed the barrel down.

‘It’ll be gone in a sec,’ said the Old Captain.

The object floated out into the open air, turned towards the sea, then
abruptly shot away. In moments it was out of sight.

In response to Peck’s querying look, Ambel said, ‘Warden stuff. Likes to know
where all the adult leeches are, and who’s getting hold of the sprine.’

‘Ah,’ said Peck. ‘Like mebbe hornets.’

‘Yes, certainly them,’ Ambel agreed.

As they headed back towards the Treader, Ambel glanced across to where the
others were raking amberclams out of the sand. Really it was meat like that
they most needed, but he had been unable to resist the lure of a bile duct
obtainable without having to harpoon a living leech and cut it open out at
sea.

‘Gettin’ some local activity now,’ announced Peck.

Ambel glanced back to see a rhinoworm rearing out of the sea, ten metres
behind the beached leech—and other disturbances in the water to either side of
it. He had observed this sort of thing before. It was as if the local fauna
sensed the most poisonous part of the leech had been removed and that now it
was time to feed. Often, seeing activity of this kind—the curious behaviour of
molly carp, the awareness of danger in some whelks—Ambel wondered about the
intelligence of some of the creatures here. The sails were obviously
intelligent, but other Spatterjay animals definitely reacted in ways that were
noticeably . . . odd.

Back at the ship, Boris threw him a rope, which he then tied to the bile duct.

‘Stow it carefully,’ said Ambel, as Boris hauled the organ aboard.

Ambel and Peck then returned to join Anne and the others. There was a stink in
the air of the dried fish flakes scattered over the wet sand to lure up the
molluscs. The juniors were now raking up the big amber-lipped white clams,
while Anne and Sild collected them in riddles, washing them off in a nearby
pool, and filled sacks with them.

‘Wonder if there’ll be any pearls?’ Peck was watching Ambel.

Almost unconsciously Ambel patted his pocket where he kept the only pearl he
had ever extracted from a clam. Peck was wise to his trick of seemingly
discovering this same pearl just prior to some dangerous venture—a sign of
good luck. Ambel glanced back at the leech. Two rhinoworms were now arced up
over the rear of it, like pink question marks, turning their rhinoceros heads
from side to side as if trying to figure out what might have happened to it.
Their behaviour was similar to vultures approaching the corpse of a lion:
aware that here was available meat, but cautious of the possibility that it
might still have some life in it. Then one of them plunged down, bit deep,
thrashed from side to side, and tore off a chunk of brown and purple flesh.
Ambel decided there was little time for play-acting when, over to one side, a
single prill splashed up on the beach, and behind it sharp cones rose like
teeth emerging from the waves as a flock of frog whelks came marching in.

‘That’ll be enough, Anne,’ he decided. ‘We’ll have more company soon.’

The juniors stopped raking to help collect the clams already raked to the
surface, and soon they were all trudging back to the ship, laden with their
booty. With two heavy sacks gripped in each hand, Ambel kept an eye on the
host gathering around the huge leech corpse. Something there focused his
attention. One of the rhinoworms appeared to have gone, which surprised him
as, with such bounty available, the creature should not have left until
utterly bloated. He kept glancing back, then saw the second worm being
wrenched back down under the waves, disappearing like a lead bar dropped
end-on into the water.

‘Looks like a molly carp just arrived,’ remarked Anne, also having witnessed
this.

Ambel wondered. It would have to be a very big and powerful carp to drag a
rhinoworm down that hard, so surely they should see some disturbance in the
sea there. There was none.

‘Pick your feet up, lads,’ he said calmly.

Prill and frog whelks were now swarming over the massive corpse, like flies on
a turd. Suddenly the body jerked. The prill still clung on with their sickle
legs embedded in slimy flesh, but frog whelks were bounding away in every
direction. A large flat tentacle rose up out of the sea, hovered like a cobra,
then slammed down on the leech to get a better grip.

‘Boris! Up anchor!’ Ambel bellowed. Then to his fellows he said, ‘I think we
should . . . run.’ He really had no need to say that last word, as by then
they were all sprinting off ahead of him. Shortly they reached the ship, and
while the juniors scrambled up on deck, Anne and Sild threw up to them the
sacks of clams. Ambel dropped his own sacks for them to deal with, braced
himself against the side of the Treader, and pushed, hard. The woodwork before
him creaked and groaned, and he sank down into the sand up to his thighs.
Heaving himself out again, he found another spot and pushed again. The last
sack now up on deck, Sild and Anne climbed aboard as the ship slowly drifted
out from the sand bank. It was already a few metres clear, Galegrabber
unfurling and turning into the wind, when Ambel leaped the gap, caught a
ladder, and scrambled aboard.

‘Not too close to the wind,’ he said casually, striding over to take up his
blunderbuss from its hooks. Boris was now loading the deck cannon while Anne
turned the helm.

‘Quickest way,’ Anne replied.

Ambel shook his head. ‘We need deep water. This breeze’ll take us straight
over there.’ He gestured towards where the remains of the leech were
disappearing into the sea. Anne nodded and swung the helm back a little.
Galegrabber turned both himself and the fabric sails to the optimum angle.

A tense few minutes passed as the Treader eased out into deeper water.

‘ ‘Bout now,’ said Ambel.

Anne swung the helm over, and the ship turned full into the wind to take it
past the grey beaches. As they drew athwart the groove left in the grey sand
where the leech had lain, something groped stonily along the hull for a moment
and slapped the rudder so that the helm spun from Anne’s grip. She quickly
grabbed hold again and straightened up. A tentacle, more rounded in section
this time, and with a pallet-knife tip, speared into the air behind them and
slammed down on the sea, spraying them with spume.

‘Easy now,’ said Ambel.

Further long minutes passed and then, as the packet-worm corals dropped behind
them, they began to breathe easier.

‘Same one?’ asked Peck, hugging his shotgun.

‘I reckon,’ said Ambel. The Captain then eyed the deck, which was scattered
with sacks spilling amber-clams. ‘Best we get them shelled quick and into
vinegar,’ he said. Later, when Sild opened a particularly large amberclam,
yelled delightedly and held up a pearl to show everyone, Ambel grunted
noncommittally.

* * * *

So bloated with leech flesh she was ballooning from her shell, the giant whelk
slapped her tentacles in frustration against the edge of the underwater cliff.
Behind her the seabed sloped up steeply to the beaches and packet-worm corals.
She could feel the constant vibration of the long tubular worms boring their
burrows into the rock as they sought the minerals they required, and felt a
sudden surge of anger. She wanted to slide back to dig them out and rip them
to pieces, as if it were their fault. But still she clung to the edge,
watching the ship’s hull moving away above her. When it at last became
difficult to discern, she directed her dinner-plate eyes downwards.

The cliff dropped hundreds of metres into a rocky terrain scattered with
forests of kelp trees, tangled with vine wracks, and prowled by pods of
glisters. Though the glisters would be unable to actually hurt her, their
constant probing attacks could prove very irritating, and this would slow her
down just as much as the terrain itself. She might easily lose the scent; lose
the ship.

The giant whelk knew that her own intelligence had increased due to her
previous efforts and requirements. She could feel the increasing heaviness of
the organ inside her that was the source of that increase. Now also available
to her were memories she had never before needed, and one of them was of
gliding through the depths like a heirodont. This further frustrated her: the
knowledge that at one time she had swum, rather then dragged herself along the
bottom. She strained away from the cliff edge, yearned for that ability again.

Her guts rumbled, their load of leech flesh churning acidically, and she began
to pump them. After a moment she lifted on a massive fart. Huge bubbles of gas

boiled out around her, and she felt the rush of nutrients pumping around her
ichor-stream. Then something inside her wrenched open painfully, up and back
into her shell, some occlusion. Her shell crackled and, turning one eye, she
observed flakes of deep encrustation peeling away from her living shell and
falling off. Pressure grew and again she lifted up trying to expel it, but
this did not pass through its usual route. The pressure dropped and the
occlusion wrenched further open. Still watching her shell, she saw noxious
clouds squirting from hundreds of raw little orifices that had opened up in
it. Her guts continued rumbling and sloshing, until eventually gas began
bubbling from her shell itself, and the orifices then closed. Realizing she
was now much lighter, she rose up on her tentacles, lifting her fleshy skirt
off the ground. She spread her skirt, engulfing cubic metres of sea water,
then slammed it closed again, driving herself up and out, over the cliff edge.
She began to fall, but shrugged her shell again and tonnes of encrustation
slewed off it into the depths. Her shell now possessed the colouration,
pattern and shape of a juvenile. Engulfing more sea water she tilted towards
the distant ship’s hull, and jetted on.

* * * *

10

Land Heirodont:
there are many thousands of species of this creature catalogued, and probably
more yet to find. They range in size from creatures as small as a pinhead to
the wood pig, which can grow as large as an elephant. All of them are
herbivores. Fossil evidence proves that there were once carnivorous varieties,
and that heirodonts dominated the biosphere before the rise of the leeches.
Their overall appearance is vaguely mammalian, with heirodonts being
comparable to many Terran animals, though possessing the mandipular mouthparts
of insects. There are two sexes, and the females give birth to fully developed
young carrying a thick layer of back meat. No other kind of offspring would
survive to adulthood, for the land heirodont spends a life of pain feeding
upon foliage and bark, while perpetually being fed upon by falling leeches.
This lifetime of pain is little different for the ocean heirodont -

Since the spaceship had stopped moving and shut down what sounded like large
turbines, the weird Prador had been coming to fetch its captives regularly. In
the last five hours it had taken four more of them. Now just Lannias, his wife
Shalen, and himself were left and, by sitting as far from the door as he
could, Orbus hoped it would be the other two that the Prador would come for
next. They seemed ready—almost anxious to join their fellows in whatever hell
the monster provided. Even so, that would only delay matters for Orbus. There
would be no escape from this. By the way the drone had come at them from the
sea, the pressure changes he had felt, the sounds and the movements of this
spaceship, he surmised they were deep in Spatterjay’s ocean.

Captain Orbus sighed and leant back against the rough wall, transferring his
gaze to a big leaf-shaped louse creeping towards his leg. A couple of these
had already nipped him, and he supposed they had developed a taste for human
flesh—their main purpose being to clean up food scraps the Prador dropped. He
waited until the louse’s front end began to rear, antennae waving and
tri-hooked mandibles opening, then snatched the thing up. Its back curled
around his hand as it tried to stab him with its ovipositor. Counting the
large outer legs and the short spiky inner legs, he wondered for a moment how
close a kin it might be to the monsters after which it kept house, then he
drew his knife and began hacking away those multiple legs. Shortly he was left
with just its flat armoured body, still bearing mandibles and antennae. Now
being quite proficient at this, he thrust in behind the mouthparts and
levered. With a crunch the mandibles popped out, and he tore them away from
gristly flesh and tossed them aside. He then worked his knife in along the
carapace edge, stuck his thumbs in, and folded the body open like a book. The
green sac at the back was edible, as one of the now removed crewmen had
discovered, though it smelt of shit and naphtha. Orbus cut it out and
discarded it before using the tip of his knife to winkle out the soft bits
from the creature’s many internal compartments. They tasted something like raw
hammer whelk, and there was just enough to stave off his hunger.

Lannias and Shalen, Orbus noted, had not eaten in some time, and showed no
inclination to dine on the lice coming near them, rather waiting until the
creatures first bit, then crushing them with their fists. The two were
apparently competing to see which could end up with the most sets of louse
mandibles embedded in their legs. This, Orbus felt, was adequate demonstration
of how twisted his own crew had become, and how twisted he himself had become
to encourage it. It almost seemed that what would soon happen to him was a
deserved punishment.

He tossed away the empty shell and heaved himself upright, noticing how deeply
blue the other two looked, and how their ridiculous giggles kept growing
louder. He himself was not so blue yet; his diet of ship lice must be staving
off the change in just the same way as did dome-grown food. Stretching his
aching limbs he realized the other two were now staring at him.

‘Ca’in,’ said Lannias, smiling brightly, unable to articulate the ‘pt’ because
of what was now growing in his mouth.

Orbus just looked away and tried to ignore him, not liking the immediate urge
he felt to go over and kick the man insensible. Shalen started giggling
uncontrollably. She thrust her hand down the front of her trousers and began
playing with herself. She seemed unable to keep her eyes still and her chin
was wet with drool.

‘Captsss!’ she hissed.

Lannias stood up. Orbus recognized the man’s expression as one possessed to a
lesser extent by all his old crew. But now it turned the man’s features
grotesque. Lannias drew his own skinning knife and began stabbing its tip into
his own chest as if to test it. Surely he didn’t think himself capable of
taking on an Old Captain? Apparently he did for, when mutilating himself
abruptly became too much of a bore, he suddenly rushed towards Orbus.

Orbus crouched, and slashed his own knife in an arc before him as a warning.
But Lannias did not even slow. Orbus straight-armed him in the face with a
flat hand, snapping the man’s head back and flinging him to the floor, then
circled round.

‘Want a little tussle do you?’ he asked nastily.

The hell with it, he thought; this might not improve their situation, but it
would make him feel better.

Lannias rose quickly, his tongue wagging as he spat out a couple of teeth.
Grinning, he jumped forward, slashing at his Captain’s face. Orbus swayed back
and cut up, opening the man’s forearm. Then there came a sound that sent a
shudder through him. The door was opening again.

‘Ca-a ca-a ca-a!’

Lannias tried to bury his knife in Orbus’s guts.

‘Fucking idiot!’

Orbus slapped down Lannias’s knife hand and cut hard across his face, bursting
one of the man’s eyes and feeling his knife crunch through the gristle of
Lannias’s nose.

‘Urg,’ said Lannias, staggering back.

Suddenly a weight came down on Orbus’s back, arms and legs wrapping around
him, and something wet licked round his ear.

‘Nicesss Captainsss,’ said Shalen.

He reached back, grabbed clothing, ducked, and slammed her down on the floor.

‘Damned bitch! You . . .’

A huge claw closed hard around his waist. He felt several ribs breaking and he
vomited a stream of louse meat.

‘Fuck you! Fuck you!’ he kept repeating as the Prador retreated with him to
the door. He snapped his knife trying to puncture the adamantine claw,
struggled to no avail, and wished with all his heart that he had some sprine.

* * * *

The third day’s Intertox injection immediately stopped her struggling against
the braided monofilament restraints. Janer was glad about that—her bonds had
been stretching alarmingly. Her breathing became stentorian, rattling that
horrible flaccid tongue in her mouth. For a second she looked at him with
tired sanity, before her eyes started rolling again. He uncapped a bottle of
supplement and watched her speculatively, not liking what he must do next and
wondering if the clamp gripping her head would hold. He stepped forwards,
thrust the bottle neck deep into her mouth, and pinched her nose closed. She
struggled at first, thrashing like a beached turbul, then abruptly started
swallowing. Once she had drained half the bottle, her eyes opened wide and she
stared at him directly. He withdrew the bottle, recapped it, and wiped her
chin. Enough for now. As she closed her eyes and slept, Janer moved away.

Having now had time to look around, Janer fully realized what tasks awaited
himself and Erlin—if she did not decide to throw Bloc off the side of the ship
when she recovered. Four rows of chainglass tanks extended for hundreds of
metres in both directions, two rows on either side of a wide aisle
interspersed with three wide pillars which enclosed mast stairwells, and the
same arrangement on the deck above. With each tank came a set of equipment
similar to that they had used on Sable Keech himself: a chrome autodoc,
diagnosticer, sets of body probes with optic connections, and a voice
generator with an assortment of connections for the varying kinds of
reification hardware. Pipes ran along the floor beside the tanks, and
connected into each. Others ran along the ceiling, also with spurs leading
down to each tank. These were obviously for filling and draining them, but he
wondered what with? They had used sea water as an amniot for Keech. It
contained microbes as hardy as any other Spatterjay life form, and had been a
nightmare to sterilize. There were also stretchers and trolleys here—no doubt
intended to bring in the half-dead half-alive reifs after their religious
experience on the Little Flint—and there were restraint tables like the one
Erlin currently occupied, for holding reifs should they go into conflict with

their own cybermotors, as had Keech.

Janer turned back to Erlin, wondering how long he should leave it before
administering yet another injection. He watched her for a while, then went out
to take a turn around the outside of the deckhouse as the sun set. He next
took the stairwell down to the crew quarters in the stern, obtained food in
the galley, and chatted for a while with some bored Hoopers sitting around in
the mess; before returning to the Tank Rooms to sleep the night away on the
table next to Erlin. The following morning he administered more Intertox. The
day after that she tried to talk, but her tongue still got in the way. It did,
however, seem to be shrinking, and her colour was less blue. Another night and
the best part of the next day passed before he dared consider freeing her.

‘What the hell is this?’ Erlin asked, as she shakily stepped out across the
main deck towards the port rail. The sea stretched endlessly before them, the
dark green of laurel with not an island in sight, but the vista divided by
ratlines and stay cables. She eyed some reifications standing a short distance
away, scanned around the ship, then turned and peered up at the forest of
masts, spars, cables and fabric sails in which lurked the three sentient
sails, two living and one debatably so. ‘Bastards,’ she added.

‘This is the Sable Keech,’ said Janer. ‘I was willingly recruited. I gather
you did not come of your own free will?’

‘Damned right I didn’t, though the alternative at the time didn’t seem so
good.’ Erlin suddenly looked uncomfortable and added, ‘At least that’s what
any sane person would think.’

Janer glanced at her questioningly, then wondered if he had released the
restraints too soon when she went on to describe her nearly terminal encounter
with a giant whelk.

‘Why weren’t you with Ambel?’

‘I needed a break,’ was all she allowed, then went on, ‘What’s this all about
here?’

‘You’re on a ship full of reifications sailing towards the Little Flint—sort
of following in the footsteps of Keech. A pilgrimage.’ Janer stabbed a thumb
over his shoulder at the Tank Room. ‘I think you can guess what happens when
we reach that destination.’

‘Whose bright idea is this?’ Erlin asked.

‘A reif called Taylor Bloc. He was financed by Lineworld—’

Erlin snorted at that.

Janer continued, ‘Yes, I know. But with a little help from a hooder he now has
them off his back.’

‘Hooder?’

Janer explained what happened back at the island, then went on with, ‘He and
his followers are fanatical—as far as you can tell with reifs. I gather that
having us aboard, being one-time companions of Sable Keech himself, is
something of a coup for Bloc—something akin to having some Apostles at a
Christian church service. Though I rather suspect we are expected to feel
honoured and humble.’

‘So objecting to being kidnapped, and demanding I be released, might not be
too bright. Anything else I need to know?’

Janer shrugged. ‘Some things going on here I haven’t quite fathomed yet, but
that’s about it.’ He grimaced. One of those things concerned Isis Wade, but he
was not about to complicate matters by telling Erlin about that. He gazed back
along the deck, observing a group making its way down an outer stair from the
bridge. Soon the group was close enough for him to recognize some of its
members. He pointed. ‘Here comes Bloc and a few others.’

‘Damn me,’ said Erlin, as they drew closer.

‘Erlin!’ bellowed Captain Ron. He was the first to reach them and he swept
Erlin up in a hug.

‘Put me down, oaf.’ After he did so she continued, ‘Janer here neglected to
mention you. Last I heard you were off-planet. So what are you doing here?’

Ron waved a hand about. ‘I’m the Captain.’

Erlin glanced at Janer and raised an eyebrow, before turning to the others.
‘And Forlam’s here, too,’ she said, her tone neutral. ‘How are you doing,
Forlam?’

‘I do well enough.’ Forlam looked slightly guilty, for some reason.

Erlin turned to the reifs. ‘And one of you three is Taylor Bloc.’

Bloc stepped forwards, from between Aesop and Bones. ‘That would be me.’

Janer could tell nothing from his tone, but doubtless he was wondering what
Erlin’s immediate reaction would be to being kidnapped and hauled all the way
out here. He wanted to warn her to be very careful, but need not have worried.

Erlin held out her hand. ‘Then I want to thank you for saving my life, though
that was not strictly your intention.’ She paused. ‘It is precious to me.’

After a hesitation Bloc gripped her hand, his eye irrigators working
over-actively, which was, Janer now realized, the only indication of this reif
experiencing some strong emotion.

‘I am glad to have helped. Zephyr has told me of the circumstances in which he
found you. I also must apologize for bringing you here like this, but our need
is great. . .’

Erlin released his hand and smiled around. ‘No need to apologize,’ she said
smoothly. ‘I’m sure I can allow you months or even years from a lifetime that
could possibly last thousands of years for me. Whether intentionally or not,
directly or indirectly, you did save my life. Anyway, as you are perhaps
aware, one of the greatest dangers to a person of my many years is boredom,
and this,’ she waved a hand to encompass the ship, ‘looks interesting.’

‘So, when required, you will apply your considerable knowledge and abilities
to helping my people .. . Arise?’ Bloc asked.

‘Certainly. The possibility of my refusing you is doubly remote now that I see
that my friends are here willingly.’ She indicated Janer, Ron and Forlam.

Bloc nodded woodenly. ‘Perhaps you can prepare yourself as soon as possible.
It has come to my attention that some reifications are already infected with
the Spatterjay virus, and that the Intertox inhibitors merely slow its
progress in them.’

‘Not surprising really,’ Erlin said offhandedly. ‘Any form of Intertox,
whether in balm or blood, possesses a short active life. It won’t therefore
access those places the balm reaches by slow percolation, like your bones,
where the virus also grows.’

Bloc turned slowly to gaze at one of his companions, before turning back.
‘This sort of knowledge is precisely why we need you, Erlin Taser Three
Indomial.’ He paused, eye irrigators working so hard that moisture was now
running down his wrinkled face. ‘Please consider yourself welcome aboard the
Sable Keech, and if there is anything you require, anything at all, please
contact me at once. Now, I have some matters to which I must attend. Perhaps
later I can give you a tour of our ship?’

‘That would be wonderful,’ said Erlin.

Even Janer could not fathom whether or not her delighted smile was genuine.
Bloc turned and departed, with his two companions in close step behind him.
Once he was out of sight, Erlin scanned her surroundings before turning to
Ron.

‘Okay, Ron, what the fuck are you really doing here?’

‘Someone’s got to keep an eye on things,’ muttered the Old Captain.

‘Why you?’

‘It’s my job.’

‘Job?’

‘Yeah. Pays well too.’

‘And who’s paying you?’

Ron shrugged resignedly. ‘Windcheater.’

Oh hell, thought Janer.

* * * *

The cave had been excavated over the millennia by a stream wearing gradually
through flinty chalk then limestone running down alongside a basalt column
that had been created some time in the island’s volcanic past. Packetworm
burrows also intruded, to confuse matters, and the drone spent many hours
scanning tunnels that led out promisingly sometimes thousands of metres, but
always ended at some ancient collapse. On the third day, Thirteen thought it
had found the hooder, on coming upon the petrified corpse of a massive
packetworm a metre in diameter, its grinding head resting against the basalt
that had finally defeated it. The creature must have been dying when it hit
this obdurate rock, and just did not have the energy left to turn around.
Passing it, the drone explored deeper.

Other living creatures also attracted Thirteen’s notice. There were no leeches
in the cave, so a species of land heirodont had escaped their attention. These
creatures were no bigger than the drone itself—pallid armadillo forms with
stunted mandibles. In pools swam their prey: globular white fish that appeared
to share ancestry with boxies, diamond-shaped jellyfish, and strange animals
mistakable as bonsai baobabs until they scuttled along the stream bed on their
rootish feet. But of the hooder there was still no sign.

Eventually, the cave system now completely mapped in its mind, the drone
returned via a winding route to the surface. It had scanned every square metre
of the island. It had run geoscans into soft ground and, though finding some
strange items it might like to investigate later, had found no sign of the
alien monster buried there. There were other cave systems, but none large
enough to conceal the creature. Thirteen was certain it had missed nothing.
Now it reviewed what it had downloaded via the planetary server regarding
hooder biology.

They were incredibly tough, and incredibly difficult to kill with most weapons
available to the Polity. like flat-worms, if they were broken into segments,
each of those segments could eventually grow into another hooder. Their home
environment was swamp, on a planet with very little oxygen in its atmosphere.
However they did still need oxygen to survive, a small amount of which they
obtained from the atmosphere itself, some by eating the oxygen storage cells
in their prey, and the rest by cracking CO2 in photochemical and
electrochemical reactions. Such creatures could survive underwater for a

considerable time, but they could not swim—were too heavy for it. On their
home planet the only specimens found in the sea had been those that had
drowned. Had it ventured into the sea? Thirteen thought this unlikely. So
where was it then? Thirteen rose high out of the dingle on Mortuary Island,
revolved in the air and gazed out across the ocean, tilted itself towards the
horizon, and set out.

* * * *

Leaning against the stern rail, Santen Marcollian gazed out across the sea.
She had been a cultist for her first fifty years of existence as a reif—after
her unfortunate accident with a grenade—but even being dead did not prevent
one growing up. That half a century taught her a lot, and in the end, feeling
she had outgrown the Cult of Anubis Arisen, she rejected it and went her own
way. Consequently, it peeved her that this voyage was controlled by the likes
of Bloc, who though not a cultist of the old style, still espoused some of its
ideals. And, after that scene on her first day aboard, she was beginning to
wonder if she had made a big mistake.

Bloc’s armed Kladites were everywhere, and that worried her. Yes, this was a
ferocious world, but they were aboard a large ship protected by automated
laser turrets dotting the hull. Nothing nasty was going to get aboard, so
perhaps it was the case that the nasty thing was already here. She looked
around, noting a few other reifs strolling about out on deck, experiencing
what they could of their surroundings in their own limited way. The prospect
of actually returning to life, like Sable Keech, had brought her here—to
actually be able to feel again: wind against skin, movement through the inner
ear, the roughness of this metal rail against her palm . ..

‘How are you enjoying the ocean life?’

Santen turned and saw that the reif John Styx had stepped up beside her.
Studying him, Santen wondered what had killed him, since there was no visible
damage to his body, and for a reif he moved with a surprising smoothness.
Prior to their earlier encounter aboard this ship, she had witnessed him, when
the hooder had attacked, taking up a Batian weapon and firing on the creature
while other reifs, herself included, merely took cover.

‘It is becoming somewhat boring,’ she replied.

‘After just eight days?’

‘Yes, after just eight days.’

‘Never mind, I’m sure that will soon change.’

‘What do you mean?’

Styx shrugged—which was not an easy thing for a reif to do. ‘Have you received
Bloc’s summons?’

‘Yes.’ Santen checked her internal clock. The meeting was due in only half an
hour in a hall down in the bilge, immediately above the rudder. Santen
wondered where the intervening time had gone. ‘He’s probably going to lay down
the law for us. And I somewhat doubt he’s going to be making any concessions,
perhaps rightly so.’

‘Will he have us standing in ranks practising our salutes?’ Styx asked.

‘Let’s hope not. I already left the Cult of Anubis Arisen, and have no
intention of joining its bastard offspring.’

Styx nodded. ‘Apparently he’s been delivering some lecture to us all a hundred
at a time. At least this is what I’ve been told, though those already called
in are rather close-mouthed about what went on. His own people, of course,
don’t need any instructions.’

‘It’s Cult shit, I guarantee. Even if he and his followers are technically not
supposed to be cultists.’

Styx remained silent.

‘You know,’ Santen went on, ‘I find it difficult
swallowed all that garbage for as long is I did:
identity; the Cult empowers each individual with
the rest. It took me far too long to realize the
its leaders wealthy and powerful.’

‘Like a religion,’ suggested Styx.

now to understand how I
The Cult is to give us
the strength of all. . . and
Cult is just a way of making

‘Like a religion,’ Santen agreed. ‘And this is no different. Shall we go down
and see what our tour guide has to say? It might at least be amusing.’

‘Let’s hope so,’ murmured Styx.

They began making their way along the deck.

‘At least the Hoopers don’t have to put up with this crap,’ remarked Santen,
eyeing one man who was cleaning some organic mess from the visible section of
one of the massive bow anchor chains.

They reached the jigger mast stairwell and Styx went down ahead of Santen. She
noted again how easily he moved, not checking his handholds on the banister,
nor watching where he put his feet. Probably he was a later reification than
herself, therefore running on more advanced hardware and software. Soon they
exited on the maintenance deck and walked along to another short stair leading
down to the meeting hall itself, joining others heading for the same
destination. They entered a room in which were crowded the reifs summoned this
time around, talking in low voices to each other. Santen observed Bloc
standing at one end facing them, Aesop and Bones on either side of him, and a
squad of Kladites arrayed behind. Studying the room itself she noted the floor
was polished wood, and that there was a line of cupboards along one entire
wall. The door to one of them stood open, revealing stacks of folding chairs.
Doubtless this hall was intended for conferences, but Bloc had not thought to
put out the seating.

‘Please close the door,’ he said to the last reifs entering. When this was
done Bloc continued, ‘Welcome, fellow searchers.’

Ellanc Strone, who had positioned himself near the front, interrupted. ‘Ah, it
now seems I’m not supposed to be here.’ He turned to go.

‘Please wait. What I have to say is important, and concerns you all.’

‘It better be good,’ said Strone, turning back.

‘Oh it is,’ said Bloc, his spectacle irrigators misting moisture all around
his face. ‘It concerns discipline aboard this ship, and the establishment of
an efficient regime. This is not a pleasure cruise; it is my ship and I do
expect obedience.’

‘That’s interesting,’ replied Strone.

‘Yes,’ Bloc nodded, ‘it is. Now you all received notification of the ship
regulations, through your cabin screens, when we set out, but it seems some of
you require a reminder. You have all been allotted specific times when you can
come up on deck, you have all been clearly informed of those areas where you
cannot trespass, but many of you persist in ignoring such simple instructions.
May I remind you that this is not a Polity world, and so Polity law does not
protect you.’

‘You see,’ muttered Styx.

‘What’s it to be then? A flogging? Walking the plank?’ someone said.

Bloc eyed the reif who had spoken. ‘The former will obviously have no effect
though the latter is a possibility.’

At this many of the crowd protested, perhaps remembering Aesop’s implied
threat earlier.

Ignoring the hubbub, Bloc continued loudly, ‘I am personally affronted by the
attitude shown by many of you.’ Bloc eyed Strone in particular. ‘Without me
and without this ship, you would not be here at all and would not have this
chance of Arising.’

‘The bite of a leech is not so hard to find on this planet,’ retorted Strone.

‘Yes,’ said Bloc. ‘But what about the expertise of Erlin Taser Three Indomial
here onboard, what about the tanks I have provided, the presence of Janer Cord
Anders, the opportunity to more precisely follow the path Sable Keech himself
walked?’

‘I don’t recollect anything about him coming right out here,’ sneered Strone.

‘I will bring you to the Little Flint,’ continued Bloc, ignoring him. ‘And
what do I get—nothing but complaints about matters that are almost ephemeral?’

‘You’re cashing in on us. You and that fucking Lineworld,’ said Strone.

‘I am not,’ Bloc protested. ‘If it was not for me, Batian mercenaries would
now be running this ship, and then . . .’

In the pause John Styx muttered, ‘Now that’s very interesting.’

The protests and interruptions started up again. Every time Bloc tried to say
something, he was shouted down.

‘What is?’ asked Santen.

‘Well, the bulk of those mercenaries were killed by a creature supposedly
shipped to this world by Lineworld Developments, so you would think it hardly
due to Bloc that they are not currently running this ship.’

Santen felt a horrible disquiet as she returned her attention to Ellanc
Strone, speaking again on behalf of all the complainers.

‘So this is better, is it?’ Strone pointed to the Kladites gathered behind
Bloc. ‘You cheat us, expect our obedience, and now you’re prepared to enforce
it.’

Bloc bowed his head as the verbal assault continued, then he held up his
hands. ‘Quiet! Please, quiet!’ When the noise had dropped to a mutter, he
continued, ‘Obviously we are getting nowhere here today. I shall have to look
into the matter of compensation, for which I will need to contact Lineworld.
When I have done that, I will meet with you again, and we will sort all this
out.’

He stepped forwards, the crowd parting before him. The Kladites fell in behind
him as he left the room.

‘So the complainers are getting somewhere,’ observed Santen.

‘Precisely where, I wonder,’ replied Styx.

* * * *

Visually checking his hand- and footholds as he climbed, Wade experienced a
momentary amusement. Who would have thought he would ever fear heights? It was
the human façade, for to be an anthropoid Golem required a high level of human
emulation. He did not really fear heights, just ran a program to adjust his
behaviour to that of a human aware that to fall now would mean death. In
defiance of that same emulation, he paused for a moment, turned and gazed
around him. A cool breeze was blowing off the sea. On the horizon the sun
bloated as it set: a dull lime orb poised at the far end of the ocean, cloud
boiling up around it like steam it created as it seemingly submerged, this
spreading in a static explosion, shredded across the sky, its inner faces
green and yellow, the outer faces gold and red. A trail, as of green-tinted
mercury, cut across the dark sea to the ship. The occasional frothy wake
appeared as mid-sized leeches surfaced and probed the air with their trumpet
mouths. Wade nodded, as if the view confirmed something for him, then peered
up the length of this massive mainmast he clung to, which at this point
tapered to a mere half a metre thick. Only a little way still to go.

Eventually reaching his destination, he stretched up and grabbed a spar. A
hook claw released its hold right next to his hand, and the expanse of
monofabric wing above folded in on its many-jointed spines. Wade hauled
himself astride the spar, then looked upwards.

‘I was hoping you wouldn’t come up here,’ said Zephyr.

‘I gave you a few days to learn the ropes, so to speak, and there has been
much here to divert me. But our business is only just beginning. You must
still be undecided to have come all the way out here.’

‘Time is not an issue,’ said the sail.

‘I disagree. It very much is an issue.’

‘It might be for you, but I am a complete entity. I owe nothing to how I was
made.’

‘Then death is an issue,’ said Wade.

The Golem sail hissed and swung its head away, then abruptly swung it back,
stopping only half a metre from where Wade sat. He was uncomfortably aware

that not only was he the focus of a pair of emerald eyes, but also the focus
of a particle cannon. It was utterly illogical that an entity so hating death
would carry such potent means of delivering it. Wade turned his head away and
peered down towards the activity on the deck.

‘And it is certainly very much the issue aboard this ship, hence our interest.
Are reifications dead, and once dead can they live again? Why do Hoopers value
the potential of death, then bank it?’

‘They know Death, and they fight to defeat it.’

‘Then we are in agreement. You understand, and it is time to tell your other
self.’

‘We are not in agreement. Reifications are truly dead. Hoopers are alive.’

‘So you believe, as humans once did, in a soul?’

‘Life is the totality: body and mind, and their sum, their synergy. Death is
the antithesis that must be destroyed. I will begin that destruction and . . .
live.’

Zephyr’s eyes were flickering like faulty lamps, and Wade sensed some of the
turmoil the Golem sail was suffering. He knew that turmoil: the war fought
between emotion and intellect inside all conscious beings . . . even sane
ones.

‘You are not alive,’ he said.

‘I am alive,’ Zephyr growled.

‘No. You claim reifications are dead, yet how are they different to you? They
are minds loaded to crystal, just like you are, and just like our progenitor
could be, if you could persuade yourself of that fact.’

‘Am alive!’

Zephyr swung his head away, then cracked it back hard. Wade went backwards off
the spar, then was hurtling down towards the midship deckhouse. Human
emulation made him grab air as if trying to slow his descent, then he overcame
this reflex and relaxed. Hitting the bubble-metal roof of the deckhouse with a
crash, he cratered it. Lying there, reflecting on the changes the real world
had already wrought in Zephyr, he heard the sound of approaching footsteps. As
they halted, one of the Hooper crew leaned over to peer down at him.

‘That were a hard landing. What happened?’

Heaving himself out of the man-shaped dent, Wade looked around as if dazed. He
noticed the rails all around the roof; the tables bolted to it ready to take
umbrellas and be surrounded by chairs. After a moment he realized he was not
fooling this Hooper. For some reason they had known what he was almost
immediately. He guessed that the sizeable dent was also a bit of a giveaway.

‘Just a little disagreement.’ He winced.

* * * *

‘Your evidence is not entirely satisfactory,’ said the Warden.

Hovering a hundred metres above the sea, with the two smaller drones on either
side of him, Sniper repressed his frustration. Returning to the search after
locating the Vignette, he tried repeatedly to convince the Warden that its
sinking should be investigated further, but the Warden had a hornet in its
bonnet about this hive-mind agent, and considered finding that intruder a lot
more important. Sniper disagreed; Prador, as far as he was concerned, were a
lot more dangerous than stinging insects.

He protested, ‘I ain’t trying to convince a legal submind. I just think this
is something I should investigate. And we’ve looked under every rock in this
area, and checked every ship—but no agent.’

‘Then it is time to widen the search.’

Sniper hissed and spun about like a coin.

The Warden continued, ‘If you believe Prador are down there, did you neglect

to record their ship’s arrival while you acted as Warden, or did they come by
runcible?’

‘No need to be sarky. There’s another possibility.’

‘Yes, the newly adult Prador that left the Seagre island ten years ago. It
would perhaps have been better if you had ensured its demise at the time.’

‘Well. I set a molly carp after the bastard, and he was at least fifteen
kilometres from its dad’s ship,’ Sniper replied grumpily. ‘Anyhow, I was busy,
and most of the SM shells were scrap by then.’

‘Busy?’

‘Well ... it took me a while to take on your role. It’s complicated up there.’

‘Complicated,’ the Warden repeated flatly. Then after a long pause: ‘Actually
you were right. The chances of the Prador surviving the molly carp were slim,
but the chances of it surviving aboard its father’s ship were utterly remote.’

‘There, y’see?’

‘So where did the Prador come from that supposedly sank the Vignette?’

‘Bollocks,’ Sniper muttered.

‘Precisely, as you say, “Bollocks.” Now let us look at the facts. The Golem
agent of an ancient hive mind is loose down there for as yet unknown purposes.
Has it not occurred to you there may be a connection?’

‘Why would a hive mind want to sink a ship and take its crew?’ Sniper asked.
‘That’s the Prador way of operating—taking the human crew to use as blanks.’

‘I don’t know, but some connection does seem likely.’

‘Nope,’ said Sniper stubbornly. ‘I still think it’s Prador.’

‘Then what do you propose?’

‘Check out Ebulan’s ship. I can get there in a few hours.’

Again a long pause. Sniper sensed something like confusion through the link.
It occurred to him that the Warden’s long confinement might have sapped the
AI’s confidence.

‘Very well, do so. But I want the geological drones to continue the search,
and you to return to it the moment you’ve ascertained the position.’

The Warden then cut the connection.

Sniper did not try to analyse why the Warden had now changed its mind. He
dropped out of the sky, then engaged his fusion engines. As he shot away he
sent back to Eleven and Twelve, ‘Come on slowpokes, get those burners on.’

* * * *

As Ambel peered through his binoculars, what he saw evinced in him some
surprise, and for the Old Captain that was no common occurrence.

‘Definitely a ship’s boat, and there’s someone waving from it,’ he announced.

‘Can’t have been out at sea here for long—wouldn’t have survived the first
rhinoworm to come along,’ observed Boris.

‘Well let’s pick ‘em up before one does happen by,’ Ambel replied.

Boris eased the helm over, and Galegrabber eased himself and his fabric
brethren to the optimum angle. The Treader curved in towards the smaller
craft, foaming out a white wake in the stiff breeze. The men in the boat began
rowing hard to intercept the ship’s course.

Climbing up to the bridge, Anne observed, ‘We’ll have to reef to pick them
up—it’ll slow us.’ Down below, Peck had already unwrapped his shotgun.

‘That’s as maybe,’ said Ambel, ‘but we can’t leave the lads to die. Anyway,
we’re out over deep water now, so there shouldn’t be any problem with big
angry molluscs.’

‘That’s good.’ Anne turned to stare behind them.

As they finally drew in beside the small boat, Boris shouted at Galegrabber,
‘Reef ’em!’ after the sail seemed a little reluctant. Muttering to itself, it
pulled the reefing cables that wadded the fabric sails up against their spars,
then climbed high up the mast, peering nervously all about. Ambel frowned at
it, then climbed down to the main deck.

‘You all right there, lads?’ he asked, leaning over the side. He vaguely
recognized the two men in the boat, which probably meant they were juniors, as
he clearly recognized every senior crewman. How could he not, having known
them for centuries?

‘Captain Ambel!’ said one of them delightedly. He was a thin-set lad with
blond hair tied in a pony tail. The other one was of squatter build, his
ginger hair patchy on the dome of his head. Another few years and it would
likely all be gone—just like Ron’s.

‘Do I know you?’ the Captain asked.

‘I’m Silister, and my friend is Davy-bronte . . . from the Vignette.’

‘Ah . . .’ said Ambel. ‘Well get aboard sharpish and you can tell me all about
it.’

The two men scrambled up the rope ladder Peck had cast down to them. Ambel
observed chunks taken out of the side of their craft, some burns, and the
remains of a rhinoworm on which the two had obviously been dining. The boat
was also partially awash. He nodded to himself—they had been adrift for a
while and survived, doubtless with some Polity assistance. As soon as the two
men were on deck and standing before Ambel, he shouted up to Galegrabber,
‘Let’s be moving along then!’ The sail seemed intent on something out at sea,

so he yelled. ‘Galegrabber!’ Eventually it obeyed and, under the boom of
fabric sail, the Treader journeyed on.

‘What about the boat?’ Peck was peering over the side.

‘Tie her off at the stern,’ Ambel replied.

Muttering imprecations Peck took up a coil of rope and climbed over the rail.

‘All right, lads, which of you has the laser?’

The two of them looked uncomfortable. Eventually the squat one, Davy-bronte,
opened his shirt and pulled out a QC laser handgun. He hesitated for a moment,
then turned it round so as to present the butt to Ambel. The Captain took the
weapon, inspected it for a moment, then handed it back to him. The look of
surprise on Davy-bronte’s face both amused and saddened him.

‘This isn’t the Vignette. It’s your weapon, so you keep it. I just want to
know who has it so I know who to call on should it be necessary.’ He pointed
up to the bridge. ‘Anne up there’s got a laser carbine. And that over there is
mine.’ He pointed to where his blunderbuss hung. ‘Now, speaking of the
Vignette, where exactly is that ship now?’

After a long hesitation, the one called Davy-bronte replied, ‘A couple of
kilometres down, I reckon.’

Ambel winced. He might not have much time for Orbus, but no Captain liked to
hear about a ship going down. The best that could be hoped for crew from a
stricken ship who ended up in the water was that something big might grab and
kill them quickly, since only very young Hoopers would have the luxury of
drowning. Ambel knew, only too well, what happened to older Hoopers left
helpless in the sea.

‘Why’s that then, lad?’

‘A big Prador war drone shot a hole through the side.’

Coming over the rail with the end of the rope, the other end of which he had

just attached to the boat, Peck said, ‘Chewin’ bloody squeaky weed bugger.’ He
then headed for the stern, flipping the slack along the rail as he went, while
the rowing boat drifted out behind the ship.

Ambel ignored his muttering. ‘Prador war drone?’

Silister now replied, ‘It come out of the sea. The Cap’n thought it was that
other big Polity drone at first an’ it harpooned him, then it rained sail meat
an’ it got Drooble first. . .’ He trailed off, looking confused, then brightly
added, ‘We were caulking the boat. We hid.’

Ambel patted him on the shoulder. ‘Perhaps you’d better start—’

‘Aaargh!’

Ambel stepped past them and hurried to the stern, in time to see Peck leaning
back hard, his feet slipping along the deck, the rope now a taut line to the
stern rail, then out to the boat beyond. Ambel stepped to the rail and saw the
boat, half sunk, waggling from side to side.

‘Let it go, Peck.’

‘Umph.’

The line slackened. The boat turned a circle, lifted up out of the water and
fell back upside down. A familiar flat white tentacle rose behind it, then
came down hard, smashing it to matchwood.

‘We got all the sail on?’ Ambel asked loudly but casually.

‘Yes, Captain!’ shouted Boris. He was also turning the Treader quickly, so it
would run with the wind.

‘What?’ asked Silister, who had followed with his companion.

‘One thing at a time,’ said Ambel. ‘Now tell me again what happened to the

Vignette.’

* * * *

The giant whelk chewed on the fragments of wood, sucking every nuance of
flavour from them. She located and gobbled up the slightly rancid chunk of
rhinoworm. She was very hungry, having discovered that swimming used up more
energy than crawling along the bottom, but all this unaccustomed activity also
made her feel more alive than ever before. Also, such were the changes she had
undergone, mentally and physically, she was beginning to question her earlier
motivations of revenge.

The bulk of her young had been eaten by a shoal of turbul, but should she ever
encounter any of that species again she would treat them no differently than
before. She would kill and eat them just the same. The human . . . yes the
word was now clear in her mind . . . had only killed one of her young, and she
was not exactly pursuing that particular human, but any with some connection
to it. No matter. She gave an underwater shrug. She would kill and eat them
just the same. That was what she did. Anyway, she was enjoying this chase. It
was with a growth of something new inside her—humour—that she recognized that
she killed and ate any living thing she could lay her tentacles on. And so she
laboured on after the Treader.

The heirodont, closing in from five hundred metres behind her, possessed no
sense of humour at all, probably because it spent most of its life being fed
upon by parasitic leeches. However, it did enjoy a chase, and it definitely
ascribed to the same creed as the whelk: it killed and ate anything it could
get its mandibles around.

* * * *

11

Sea Leech:
upon entering the ocean, the leech’s body-shape becomes leaflike to more suit
it to the pelagic life. It grows huge on a diet of flesh taken from boxies,
turbul, oceanic heirodonts—anything soft enough for it to bore into with its
plug-extracting mouth. By the time a sea leech becomes whale-sized, such prey
is too small to provide sufficient nutrient by plug feeding. However, it would
be dangerous for the leech to take prey down whole as, with the incredible
durability and voracity of all Spatterjay’s fauna, that prey would eat the
leech from the inside. Hunger drives the next transformation. The leech grows
a sprine-producing bile duct and feeds upon whole prey—poisoning them with

sprine inside its intestines. Again genetically programmed to respond to their
environment, they mate only when the surrounding population of their own kind
drops below a certain level (this measured by the quantity of particular
pheromones in the water). Leeches are hermaphrodite: they will close against
another of their kind and exchange genetic material. After this the leech dies
during the process of attaching its own body-segments to the bottom of masses
of floating sargassum. The segments then collapse into hard encystments, and
the cells inside them turn into eggs encased in sprine jelly. Each of these
hatches a diatom, which then begins its long journey to shore to become a land
leech —

In his stateroom. Bloc sat on the edge of his wide, soft and unneeded bed and
stared at the polished, oak-panelled wall—an occupation that seemed more and
more frequent to him lately. Internally, he gazed into the red tunnel
comprising the third channel from his control unit. He felt that what he
barely controlled there was his only option now. Ellanc Strone and those
aligned with him had not needed to come on this voyage, but they had, and now
their earlier complaining was turning into open defiance. Bloc realized that
Strone understood Bloc’s position here; that he was isolated and could
possibly be usurped. Could it be that the other reif was secretly working for
Lineworld? No matter, Bloc must quickly assert full control aboard this ship,
and remove all dangers to himself and this enterprise. As if to illustrate,
the reason for this now appeared on his internal visual display:

OUTPARAFUNCT: B.P. LOAD INC. 15%

He had increased the amount of Intertox in his balm to a fifth, but still he
was getting those warning messages. How long he could hold on before having to
go into a tank he did not know, but it seemed unlikely he would reach the
Little Flint before his transformation. He realized how he resented those
reifs who would. He resented their knowingness, their lack of respect for him.
He had done all this. This ship was his. And he refused to allow them to be so
casual, dismissive and contemptuous in his presence. He stood up abruptly.

VIRAL INFECT

Again that message.

IDENTIFY he instructed almost automatically.

SPATTERJAY VIRAL FORM AI

He cleared that one, then another immediately appeared.

MEMSPACE: 00037

Annoyed, he quickly cleared that too, while considering all the potential
dangers.

Strone and his followers numbered thirty-six—he had identified them all. Now,
Bloc could simply order his Kladites to dispense with them, but that would not
go down well with the other six hundred reifications aboard. Also the Hoopers,
though primitive, were necessary at the moment and, despite the automation
aboard the Sable Keech, it might be foolish to annoy them. The sails, even
Zephyr, worked to their contracts for money and that was all. If they became a
problem, though, this ship had the facility to sail on without them. It had
the facility to keep going without any sails, either living or plain fabric.
That left Janer Cord Anders and Erlin Taser Three Indomial, who he certainly
wanted to keep on his side. So, no overt action on his part, but there was
another way.

Bloc closed his eyes and turned his attention inward to the partitioned
control unit he used to control Aesop and Bones. Those two channels were
familiar and easy for him. The third channel was something else, however: a
red tunnel of madness. He ignored it for the moment and turned his attention
to his servants.

Bones he put on hold: utterly motionless in the corridor outside. Aesop he
summoned inside. Bloc opened his eyes as the door opened and closed.

‘Summon Ellanc Strone and his friends to the stern meeting hall,’ he said.

‘You’ll not settle anything with them,’ said Aesop.

Bloc eyed him. ‘Did I ask your opinion?’

Aesop remained silent.

Bloc continued, ‘Seven o’clock this evening. When that is arranged, I’ll have
another task for you, which you must complete before that meeting begins. I
think you know what it is.’ He turned away, but Aesop was not leaving, so he
turned back.

‘Leave now,’ said Bloc with finality, and pushed.

* * * *

As he stepped off the ladder Isis Wade paused to study his hands. The human
form, he felt, was interesting: perpetually on the point of toppling from its
mere two limbs but never doing so. The limitation of possessing only two legs,
however, was more than made up for by the complicated dexterity of the hands.
No doubt, had the body he occupied actually been human rather than a
mechanical construct, he would be surprised by many of its other . . .
functions. But he was Golem and, behind all this emulation of humanity,
something utterly else. He turned from die ladder and scanned the bilge.

There was a great deal down here, most of it at Lineworld’s insistence, some
at Bloc’s, and he suspected there was something else that nobody wanted here .
. . perhaps. Making his way along walkways and through hidden corridors he
approached the ship’s bows. Being Golem, his hearing was superb; he could hear
the beating of a human heart, hear it stop.

Wade shook his head—another human gesture, as if the thoughts in a mind could
be physically shaken free. It did not work, for the fact remained that he was
allowing these distractions to divert him from his prime purpose here aboard
this ship. But the human dramas were so much easier . . .

In the twisted conglomeration of rooms, corridors and walkways below the chain
lockers, Wade began scanning about himself as he proceeded. Eventually, on a
grated walkway affixed directly to the lower ribs of the hull, he found what
he was searching for. He stooped and picked up a pair of bloody trousers,
slashed to ribbons. He shook them, and caught something that fell out: a piece
of bone. It was white, with bluish striations through it, and looked as if
someone had roughed out its shape from the main bone with a small drill, then
snapped it out. Wade nipped it aside then peered over the edge of the grating.
After a moment he moved over to one side, clicked across the catches securing
one section, then hinged it up. This gave him access to what had been
deposited below the walkway. Down there were many more pieces of bone,
fragments of cloth, strings of fibrous flesh, a skinning knife and a
screwdriver. He picked up the knife and inspected the name etched into the
blade: Sturmbul. Wade accessed the list of passengers and crew he had loaded,
and after a moment nodded. Gazing into the darkness, towards the chain
lockers, he carefully reached out to pull the section of grating down, stood
back, and headed quietly in the other direction.

Halfway along the length of the hull, Wade came to his second objective down
here. The enclosed section had one metal bulkhead door with a manual wheel and
a code-input palm reader. He stared at the reader for a long moment, then took

out the skinning knife and inserted its blade under the small keypad. One
twist and this flipped away, exposing optical circuitry. He smiled—something
else he had been practising—traced the circuitry with the knife point, then
selected a plug-in chip, levered it out and pocketed it. He next moved over to
the manual wheel, braced himself and began to put on pressure. After a moment
something snapped inside the door and the wheel spun freely. As he pushed the
door open, pieces of shattered locking mechanism clattered to the floor.
Stepping inside, he stooped to pick them up and toss them out of sight, before
closing the door behind him.

Wade first eyed the row of glass-fronted lockers containing breather gear and
ceramal chainmesh diving suits, then turned his attention to the
flattened-torpedo submersible. He approached the ladder, climbed up to the
squat conning tower, where he opened the hatch and lowered himself inside.
Then, dropping into the pilot’s seat, he studied a large screen and numerous
controls. After a little while he went back outside and more closely inspected
the craft’s hull. Very quickly he found the harpoon ports and slidable
sections covering folded manipulators and chainglass vibroblades.

‘Naughty,’ he said, and shook his head.

Lineworld Developments had certainly been out to cash in wherever possible.
Wade wondered what the Hoopers aboard would have thought about them using a
submersible to harvest sea leech bile ducts. No matter, since this option was
now closed to them. Nevertheless, here, should anyone require it, was a
perfect way of obtaining the prized poison, sprine.

He again smiled to himself.

* * * *

As Aesop made his way down into the hull he felt his terror growing, but
Bloc’s control of him was as rigid as a cage. Stepping off the ladder onto the
maintenance deck, he observed a couple of Hoopers gazing through the
protective cover over a ceramal powder forge, and wondered if the ship would
soon be urgently in need of their skill if what was to happen inside it did
not sink it. He knew that the hull was double-skinned, sandwiching a layer of
crash foam, but would that be enough?

Eventually he made his way down into the bilge. Moving stealthily via stairs,
platforms and hidden corridors, he came eventually to the area Bloc had
designated: the room above the rudder hydraulics and motors where he had
earlier lectured groups of the passengers. It was dark until he touched a pad
beside the door, then star lights lit up all across a low ceiling, revealing
the room space stretching hundreds of metres from port to starboard. Aesop had
no idea what its intended purpose might be, but there were many places like

this aboard. Perhaps it was for some celebration after they reached the Little
Flint—though the bars and restaurants some way above him would be better for
that. Aesop reached into his pocket and took out an aerosol can, and as if
spraying invisible graffiti, began working his way around the wall.

‘Get a move on,’ Bloc instructed, and pushed.

Within twenty minutes Aesop was back at the door. Now, as he headed towards
the ship’s bows, he began to spray also along the corridor wall. He resisted
all the way, but to no avail—Bloc was not relaxing his control in the
slightest. He wondered if Bloc would ever allow Aesop’s memcrystal to be
recovered. Probably not, since Aesop’s mind contained far too much damning
evidence. He wondered if being destroyed would feel anything like dying. At
least there would be no pain this time, just physical destruction then . . .
nothing. Up ahead somewhere: movement. The sound was like someone sorting
through a huge wooden tool chest, though slightly more rhythmic than that.
Suddenly there came a crash, and the sound was moving towards him.

‘I’ve done it now? he pleaded with Bloc.

There was no response from the reif. Through his enslaving link, Aesop could
feel Bloc directly controlling Bones. Through Bones’s vision he glimpsed armed
Kladites creeping along a corridor on one of the upper decks. The clear-up
party, almost certainly. With Bloc’s attention elsewhere, Aesop could fight
the control. This he did, trying to pull his finger away from the aerosol
can’s spray button. With all his effort he broke through to Bloc, fed back,
and managed to ease the pressure of the programmed order. His finger came off
the button. But this was not enough to enable him to survive. He strained
harder, trying to break the link, but it was like trying to cut through cable
with a butter knife. Then suddenly he realized he was no longer walking—just
standing in the corridor, straining forwards.

‘Please let me . . .’

He jerked his hand forward, releasing the can to send it bouncing down the
corridor, just as a darkness slid, clattering, round a further corner. Aesop
desperately wanted to run: he picked one foot up and tried to turn. He would
have to fight for every step, yet knew he could not. There was a recess in the
wall beside him—the moulding for a doorway that had never been cut through. He
took one swinging, jerky step and fell into it. As he turned his head,
something passed him thunderously. Aesop might well have sighed with relief,
but considered it perhaps lucky he did not possess that ability, for it would
have heard.

* * * *

Janer, sitting in the crew mess, eyed two Hoopers gobbling down pickled hammer
whelks at a nearby table. The equipment checks in the Tank Rooms now finished,
Janer felt the pressure had come off him, so it was time to turn his attention
towards his primary purpose for being here.

The hive mind had paid him to hunt down the Golem agent of another hive mind,
who was supposedly here after sprine. He was to ‘stop’ this Golem, though
being armed by the mind with a perfect Golem assassination weapon made the
method of prevention somewhat implicit. Janer had his reservations about this,
but he was never one to turn down money, and the venture promised to be one
that might keep his perennial boredom at bay. As he saw it, he would make a
serious effort to stop this Golem without recourse to the weapon. Golem were
not stupid after all. Upon his arrival here he had realized the hopelessness
of the task. His joining Ron’s venture was a reaction to that, as had been his
attempt to return the hive mind’s payment. The mind refused it, probably
hoping to persuade him back to the task. But now his hivelink had shut down
and the hornets were dead. This had happened while he was with Isis Wade, a
rather inscrutable Golem, and Janer was convinced Wade was the one he had been
sent here to find. But what now?

Janer stood up and took his empty dish into the galley to wash it. Now, he
felt, it was time for him to start trolling for information. As far as he had
been able to gather, Isis Wade’s job was to monitor and keep running some of
the ship’s more high-tech systems—a make-work task at best. It seemed more
likely that the Golem was ensconced in his cabin, so Janer headed there.

Wade’s cabin was in the forward section, along with the quarters of those
employed to oversee the more technical systems of the ship. Finally reaching
it, Janer undid his jacket, then knocked on the door.

‘Something on your mind?’

Janer froze, then slowly turned. Wade was standing directly behind him.

‘We need to talk.’

‘Is that so?’ Wade stepped past him, opened the door and ducked inside.
Following him, Janer wondered where to start.

‘Where have you been?’ he asked.

Wade sat down on the bed while Janer closed the door and rested his back
against it. Some species of almost painful amusement flitted across the
Golem’s expression. But it was solely emulation—Janer felt he must never
forget that.

‘I went to have another look at that submersible. It was most interesting.’

‘In what way?’

Wade shrugged. Damn, but it was good emulation. ‘It would seem Lineworld was
prepared for every opportunity to make some profit, though of course it will
now profit them nothing.’

Janer repressed his irritation. ‘Profit?’

Wade stared at him directly. ‘The submersible is especially equipped to catch
leeches and remove from them their bile ducts. No doubt somewhere else on
board this ship there are facilities for refining sprine.’

Janer felt himself tensing up. Was that it, then – had this hive-mind agent
come here to take advantage of this opportunity? Certainly, obtaining sprine
from Olian’s was out of the question, yet surely one of Wade’s capabilities
could obtain that substance from any incoming ship—could have grabbed some
before it ever reached Olian’s?

‘Is that why you are here, Wade?’ he asked.

‘Certainly not. I’m here to learn some things, and to apprise an individual of
certain truths, and possibly—though I hope this will not be necessary—to
prevent a cataclysm.’

‘Can you be more specific?’

‘I can, but I won’t,’ Wade replied.

‘All right then. Can you at least answer me this: are you the agent of an
ancient hive mind?’

Wade abruptly stood up, and Janer slid his hand nearer to his concealed
weapon. He didn’t much rate his chances against Wade in this situation—in any
situation really. The Golem turned his back, opened a cupboard, and from it
removed a long box. This he placed on the bed and flipped open. Janer eyed the
weapon revealed, and felt his mouth go dry. Sable Keech had once carried
something like this. It was an APW carbine. Fire burned inside its glass body.

‘It was you . . .You fired on that hooder?’

Wade waved a hand dismissively. ‘Yes, of course. But let’s keep to the subject
of our discussion. In a sense, I am the agent you describe.’

Janer closed his hand on the butt of his own weapon, expecting the Golem to
turn on him at any moment. But even as Janer quickly drew his gun, the Golem
made no move.

‘What the hell is that weapon for?’ Janer asked.

‘I might well ask you the same.’ Wade indicated with a nod the gun now
pointing at him.

‘Self-defence,’ said Janer.

‘Equally,’ said Wade, ‘I have not as yet told you what else I discovered down
in the bilge.’

‘I’m listening.’

Wade told him.

* * * *

Ellanc Strone admiringly checked the working of the Batian weapon before
placing it on his sleeping pallet next to a collection of grenades. Quite
remiss of Bloc to have not collected all this. He turned and looked at himself

in the mirror. Now it was time to move on. He had believed in the Cult for
some years, but grown out of that, then come to hate it. He had in fact come
to hate the whole idea of reification and would have gladly dispensed with the
corpse he now saw before him. Only one thing stood in his way: money. Though
the Polity did provide Golem, clones and sometimes the bodies of mind-wiped
criminals for human beings recorded to crystal, the waiting list was fifty
years long. To actually step over that list and buy a replacement cost a great
deal and Ellanc’s funds did not stretch so far. His dislike of the Cult and
its bastard offspring, also his need for money, were what had made him accept
Lineworld’s initial offer to spy on Bloc. They were also the reason he had
accepted the offer he recently received over secure com.

He would turn Bloc into a heap of scrap metal.

Ellanc donned his long coat, concealing the Batian weapon which hung from his
belt underneath it. Quite probably he himself would be destroyed by the
Kladites. However, Lineworld had made promises, guaranteed by independent
arbiter, to load him to a Golem chassis, and pay him a disgustingly large
quantity of money. Ellanc himself had made provision for one of his fellows to
retrieve his memcrystal. Thereafter, Bloc’s people would be leaderless and
easy prey for other Lineworld operatives, who were already on their way to
Mortuary Island to await this ship’s return, and seize control of it before
the next voyage.

It was 6.30 now, and time to get going. Ellanc stepped out of his cabin and
strode along the deck that housed the reification’s staterooms, picking up his
followers as he went. As Oranol joined him he said, ‘Remember, you do nothing.
Don’t make any hostile moves—just ensure you get hold of my memcrystal.’

‘I understand,’ confirmed Oranol.

So he should—Ellanc would be paying him a lot of money for that understanding.

Twenty-five minutes later they reached the jigger stairwell and filed down to
the meeting hall. They entered, looking around, but the hall was empty.

‘I don’t like this,’ said Oranol.

‘What’s to dislike?’ Ellanc asked. ‘Bloc is probably still trying to figure
how he’s going to get out of this.’ Ellanc knew that Bloc was near bankrupt,
and that definitely no further funds would be forthcoming from Lineworld.

‘Someone’s coming,’ said one of the reifs.

Ellanc listened—and heard a rumbling sound. Probably a troop of Kladites
coming to back up some more of Bloc’s threats. Maybe some of those threats
would even be carried out. Ellanc did not care really, just so long as Bloc
came along with them. Precisely at the moment he turned, the door and half its
surrounding woodwork exploded inward, and the hooder careened into the room
like an out-of-control train.

The hard, segmented edge of the creature’s carapace cut across one reified
woman like a saw, flinging her back with her clothing torn away and chest
ripped open to expose shrivelled lungs. It slammed down on another reif, then
instantly reared up again, tossing aside something ragged and spraying blue
balm. Ellanc swung up his weapon, knowing it was useless. He fired
continuously, explosions flashing along the creature’s surface, blowing small
cavities and flinging off pieces of tough carapace. Another victim was smashed
into the back wall, yet another cupped under the monster’s hood, while its new
spiky tail lashed sideways and someone’s head bounced across the floor. It
loomed up, with pieces of reification hardware and bones falling away from
underneath its hood, whipped its head from side to side sending reifs
sprawling in every direction.

Ellanc fired at it repeatedly, aiming for the same spot on the body segment
just behind its head, trying to excavate his way in. Five reifs down in as
many seconds, possibly more. This was worse than what he had witnessed back at
the enclosure. The thing seemed maddened. He pulled a grenade and rolled it
underneath the monster. It lifted slightly on the blast, a hole blown through
the floor below it. Then it came down again and again, like a draughts player
profiting by an opponent’s fatal error. One two three four: four others
shredded to bones and tatters of milky flesh, torn clothing, spreading pools
of balm.

‘Get out!’ Ellanc shouted needlessly. ‘All of you, get out while you can!’

Just seconds of distraction, and the tail, like a swinging steel girder,
struck him in the chest and hammered him back against the wall. He glimpsed
one of his fellows being smeared across the floor like a bug under a
fingertip. Then darkness loomed over and above him as he struggled upright and
brought his weapon again to bear. Perhaps striking it underneath the armoured
hood would do it? Ellanc remembered seeing a Batian try the same, and fail, so
instead he fired down at the floor by his feet as the hood slammed down on
him. And had not the floor given way at that moment, the hooder would have
collapsed him into a grotesque dwarf.

In a shower of burning wood Ellanc landed on the cowling of a big hydraulic
motor. Fluid was squirting from a damaged ram, and the back end of the huge
ship’s rudder was sliding towards him. On the other side of it, he glimpsed,
in the tangle of pipes, rams and motors, a fire burning below the grenade

hole, further over. He looked up and saw the vertical rows of burning red
eyes, and glistening scalpel mandibles groping after him through the gap. But
by the time he brought his weapon up, it had swept out of sight. He backed
away from the rudder and sat down on a pipe. He gave a hacking sound, realized
it was a laugh. For a dead man he had not felt so alive in a long time. Then,
as doors behind him opened, he stood up and turned. Fire slammed into him,
hurling him backwards. Hitting pipework, he tumbled to the floor. Error
messages slid up into view, one after another. The smoke cleared enough for
him to see Kladites standing beyond it.

‘A few others got away,’ announced one of them.

Another replied, ‘I don’t care—we get out of here now. You saw what it did to
the others?’

Ellanc stared at the two of them. One turned and aimed his carbine at Ellanc’s
upper torso, where his memcrystal and main control hardware was located.

‘No . ..’

Fire and smoke blasted up before his face, and Ellanc slid into blackness.

* * * *

Janer gazed down at the weapon he was holding. It seemed he would be getting
just about all the excitement he could stand. As he holstered it, he noted
that Wade had now tilted his head as if listening.

Emulation.

‘Do you hear it?’ Wade asked.

Janer listened intently. He could hear nothing but the usual sounds of the
ship and the sea, but then he did not have a Golem’s hearing.

‘What?’ he asked.

‘A distinctive sound, something like a tank rolling across wooden boards, then
a Batian weapon . . . and now laser carbines,’ Wade told him. ‘Down in the
stern.’

In a fraction of a second, with a kind of snapping sound, Wade was on his
feet, holding his carbine across his stomach. Could he have got me before I
pulled the trigger? Janer wondered, and answered himself: Probably. He reached
round and opened the door, stepped out into the corridor and turned to head
for the nearest foremast stair. Reaching it, he made to go down towards the
bilge.

Wade caught his shoulder. ‘Not that way. We’d have to go through most of the
bilge itself to get there. We go along the main deck and down.’

They climbed the stair and stepped out onto the nighted deck. There Janer
witnessed something that almost physically jerked him to a halt. He felt a
further rush of adrenalin, immediately followed by confusion, asmemories
surfaced in his mind’s sea. Before him, a few metres above the deck and
regarding him with topaz eyes, hovered an iron-coloured seahorse drone.
Thirteen—the Warden’s drone that had been present during those events on the
Skinner’s Island ten years ago.

‘You’re armed. Good. We need people armed. Can’t find any of Bloc’s merry
crew. I reckon they’re down there after it.’

It took Janer a moment to realize Captain Ron was speaking to him from a few
paces beyond the drone, and that behind him stood a crowd of Hoopers and two
reifications.

‘What?’ Janer asked stupidly.

Ron stepped forward, the drone shifting aside for him. ‘Thirteen here tells me
that nasty bugger is aboard.’

Janer nodded. ‘Yes, I know.’ He gestured to his companion. ‘Wade just told
me.’

Ron eyed the Golem. ‘How might you know that?’

Wade stepped forwards, pulled a knife out of his belt and handed it across to
the Old Captain.

Peering over Ron’s shoulder, Forlam said, ‘Sturmbul. I wondered where he got
to.’

Wade said, ‘What’s left of him is lying under a walkway down in the bilge. The
hooder is down in the stern of this ship, and I heard weapons firing down
there.’

‘Heard?’ Janer asked.

‘It has ceased,’ said Wade, glancing at him.

Ron peered at the APW that Wade held. ‘Mmm, well, best we go see what’s
happened.’

Ron was armed with a heavy machete and a QC laser pistol. The others carried
weapons which, in their variety, seemed to cover human history. They ranged
from clubs and blades to muzzle-loaders, cartridge-fed weapons to various
designs of pulse gun and laser. One of them even carried a machine gun. It was
a pathetic collection of arms with which to go up against a hooder.

‘Have you been able to contact Bloc?’ Wade asked.

‘Can’t find the bugger,’ said Ron. ‘Didn’t try too hard.’

‘Maybe he’s down in the stern with his Kladites?’ Janer suggested.

Ron snorted. ‘Maybe leeches will fly. Best we get down there and lend a hand
before anyone else gets ‘emselves killed.’

‘People die,’ said Wade, a strange expression on his face.

‘Not if I can help it,’ said Ron.

Wade looked up into the rigging, smiled, then said, ‘But surely you are
risking your own life and the lives of others by becoming involved in this?’

Janer understood that the Golem was playing to an audience of one, for
Zephyr’s hearing was just as good as Wade’s.

‘Nobody wants to die,’ growled Ron. ‘But life without risk ain’t living.’

‘Could it be,’ said Wade, ‘that life without the possibility of death is not
life at all?’

Ron stared at him hard. ‘I don’t know what your agenda is, Golem, but we ain’t
got time for it right now.’

Wade shrugged. ‘Well, we do have weapons . . .’

‘Come on!’ Ron turned and led the way back towards the stern.

* * * *

12

Ocean Heirodont:
like the whales, these creatures long ago abandoned the land to return to the
sea. Only forty-seven species have been catalogued, for they have obviously
not well survived competition with the vast oceanic leech population. They are
cast in the same mould as Terran fishes and cetaceans: on the whole, those
with horizontally presented cetacean tails are herbivorous, whilst those with
sharkish tail fins are predators. They grip their food in mandibles, be that
kelp stalks or a struggling turbul, and feed it into the grinding bony plates
in their throats. The largest kind can grow half again the size of a blue
whale and is a carnivore. Its favoured prey is giant whelks, if it can drag
them from the bottom. But even something so large is subject to the predation
of giant leeches, sometimes losing a ton or more of flesh to one in a single
strike. The only relief these creatures can find from leech attack is to drop
below the depth leeches are able to reach, but they must perforce return
regularly to the surface for they are air breathers. But even when they go

deep enough to avoid leeches, they might still be attacked by giant prill—

From high up, Sniper observed the Skinner’s Island, checked his position by
internal tracking, then dropped out of the sky like a brick. He hit the sea in
a foamy explosion, and two smaller splashes followed him. Not waiting for the
other two drones, he engaged his supercavitating field, opened his tractor
drive to full power, and arrowed down into the depths in one sonic explosion.
Collapsing the field over the required coordinates, water friction knocked his
speed down by half, then he used his drive to decelerate further before
putting all his detectors at maximum range. Immediately he picked up wreckage:
pieces of exotic metal, the remains of a thruster nacelle—detritus from the
Prador ship. He checked the coordinates again, but they were correct. Down
below was a cavity in the sea bottom, cut through with the slowly filling
burrows of giant packetworms. Despite his earlier discussion he had expected,
in his metal heart, to find the Prador ship still here, and some other
explanation for recent events. The ship was gone.

‘I see,’ said the Warden, once Sniper had updated the AI over a U-space link.

‘There’s a fading silt trail,’ Sniper continued. ‘I might be able to follow
it.’

‘Yes, I noticed that, but I wonder about the underwater shock waves you are
currently generating.’

Sniper observed Eleven and Twelve slowly approaching. ‘I should think,’ he
said acidly, ‘that a Prador light destroyer might be more of a danger to the
environment than my shock waves.’

‘Very well, Sniper, continue your pursuit, but keep me continuously apprised
of your location. I will inform Earth Central of the situation.’

‘What?’

‘One must consider recent events in the Third Kingdom.’

‘Oh, so coring human beings is okay now?’

‘Keep me informed, Sniper.’

The link cut and Sniper hung in the depths mulling over the exchange. Things
had changed. The Prador, supposedly, no longer used human blanks in their
Kingdom. In recent years hundreds of thousands of them had been returned to
the Polity, and consequently hundreds of thousands of records of the war’s
missing had been closed. There were now Polity embassies on Prador worlds and
vice versa. There was trade, a very great deal of trade, for though the Prador
had never developed AI and much of their cybernetics was quaint, their metals
technology was superior in many respects to the Polity’s. It was also an open
secret that the Prador wanted runcible technology, but were baulking at the
fact that AI was needed to control it. They were perhaps aware, upon observing
the Polity itself, that once they made that step there would be no going back.
Drastic changes always ensued.

‘What now, boss?’ asked Eleven.

‘You two return to the surface and keep track of me—you won’t be able to keep
up down here. I’m going to follow this trail for as far as I can.’

‘Then what?’ asked Eleven.

‘Then, if we find him, I suppose we must politely ask our Prador guest to
leave.’

‘Yeah, sure,’ said Twelve.

* * * *

The Warden, as was its job, considered all the implications of a newly adult
Prador in charge of a light destroyer in the sea below. What would be its
aims? Not being implicated in the same ancient crimes, those would certainly
not be the same as its father’s. Even under Polity law, the crimes it
committed while under the control of its father’s pheromones were ones of
which only its father was accounted guilty. However, there was the Vignette to
consider. Its crew was missing and the ship itself at the bottom of the sea.
Admittedly no Polity citizens had been hurt and the crime, if such it was, had
been committed outside the Line. But this did not bode well for what else the
Prador might do—possibly things that could easily fall within the Warden’s
remit. There were also political ramifications. Perhaps it was time to pass
the buck? Before the Warden could decide, Submind Seven started shouting for
its attention.

‘Seven?’

‘Captain Sprage again, Bo— Warden. Says there’s someone you need to talk to.’

This time the Warden fully engaged with the conferencing link, relayed through
Seven, and gazed into the Old Captain’s cabin. The man stood lighting his pipe
with a laser lighter, his expression sombre.

‘What is it this time, Sprage?’ the Warden asked.

‘Not me this time. Ambel wants a word.’ Sprage reached out and adjusted
something out of view. The link jumped and the Warden found itself looking
into a similar cabin in which stood Captain Ambel and two junior crewmen.

‘Captain Ambel.’

‘Hello, Warden.’ Ambel looked equally sombre. ‘Good to have you back. That
other fella was a bit irascible.’

‘Yes, quite. How can I help you, Captain?’

‘Not so much how you can help me . . .’ Ambel gestured at the two juniors.
‘Let me introduce crewmen Silister and Davy-bronte, lately of the Vignette.’

The Warden abruptly focused more of its attention through the link. ‘You are
from the Vignette. What happened to your ship and the rest of the crew?’

Both the juniors stepped back, looking somewhat startled. The Warden realized
it was projecting one of its many avatar images through the link, and that the
two men were now looking at a two-metre-long grouper floating before them. It
changed the image to something more human and acceptable.

‘Well the Cap’n was right pissed-off with Drooble, an’ the harpoon went
through him, not Drooble you understand ...’ Silister babbled, until Ambel put
a hand on his shoulder.

‘I think, lad, you should let Davy-bronte tell it, just like he did earlier.’

The explanation from Davy-bronte was much more concise, and the description
unmistakable.

A Prador war drone, evidently upgraded, thought the Warden. Sniper will be
pleased.

‘Thank you for informing me,’ said the Warden.

‘One other thing,’ added Ambel. ‘You will be telling Windcheater about this?’

‘Certainly. He is, after all, your ruler.’

Ambel gave an ambivalent shrug and the comlink cut.

So, confirmation, if any more was needed. An upgraded war drone had been used,
which inferred that systems aboard Ebulan’s ship were in a good state of
repair. The same could be inferred from the fact it had been moved undetected.
Also, the fact that the adolescent Prador—the Warden checked its
records—Vrell, had survived Ebulan’s traps meant it was a very capable Prador
indeed. Deciding it needed further advice, the Warden opened a communication
channel through its own runcible, and through five other runcibles, right to
the heart of things.

‘Yes?’

The Warden transmitted all it had recently learnt, in detail, the information
zipped into a package even some AIs would have had trouble deciphering. A
microsecond later the reply came back.

‘Work to your remit as best you can, Warden. Thrall codes within the ship will
have been changed, and without signals for you to intercept you will not be
able to break them, so there will be no repeat of Sniper’s . . . lucky shot,
and you do not have the armament to deal with a functional Prador light
destroyer,’ the Earth Central AI advised the Warden. ‘I am now informing all
interested parties.’

‘Interested parties?’

After a delay of nearly half an hour, EC replied, ‘The nearest Polity warship
is two hundred light years from you. However, there is another warship much
closer.’ Earth Central then transmitted all relevant information, and a
recording of a recent conversation in which it had participated.

‘Is that a good idea?’ the Warden asked.

‘It is in the nature of a test of agreements.’

As the communication channel closed, the Warden could not decide if things had
got better or infinitely worse. Certainly the stakes had just gone up: Earth
Central was gambling with a planet and its population. The AI scanned round
inside the moon base at the crowds of Polity citizens. No need to start a
panic just yet, so it put a message up on the bulletin boards in the main
concourse and arrivals lounges:

BUFFER TECHNICAL FAULT DETECTED

The submind at the planetary base immediately queried this, and the Warden
told it what the real problem was.

‘Oh fuck,’ said the submind.

The Warden added, ‘It would be convenient if those travellers on the surface
were encouraged to leave.’ Shortly after, the Warden observed that the
departure bookings began to rise when the news-net services began speculating
about a rumoured mutation of the Spatterjay virus into a lethal form—a rumour
neither confirmed nor denied by the planetary base submind.

Then an hour later:

FAULT CONFIRMED. INCOMING TRAVELLERS ON BLOCK OR DIVERT. WE APOLOGIZE FOR THE
INCONVENIENCE. FURTHER MESSAGES TO FOLLOW . . .

Now no more Polity citizens would be coming to the moon, and increasing

numbers of them were already leaving. This meant that if things went
pear-shaped, at least the body count would be lower.

* * * *

‘Okay, lads,’ said Ambel, leading the two crewmen out of his cabin onto the
deck. ‘Peck will show you to your bunks. Tomorrow we should be reaching the
Sargassum.’

‘You gonna put us on another ship to go back?’ asked Silister.

Ambel paused.

‘Be a bugger to stop,’ said Peck, who was standing underneath a lamp, peering
out into the darkness.

The man, Ambel noted, had been very reluctant to be more than a pace from his
shotgun, and cradled it now. Perhaps understandable with what was evidently
following them. And he was right about stopping, too. The moment they did, the
giant whelk now somehow swimming after them would be all over the Treader in
minutes.

‘Peck’s got that right, I’m afraid. We’d end up in the sea if not in our
friend’s guts.’ He stabbed a thumb behind the ship. ‘So you’ll have to stay
with us for a while.’

‘Good,’ said Davy-bronte.

Ambel peered at him curiously.

Davy-bronte continued, ‘We been on the Vignette, Cap’n, so we know a good ship
when we’re on one.’

‘Okay, lads. You get some rest now.’

Ambel turned away as Peck took the two juniors below. He glanced up to Boris

at the helm, nodded to him, then strolled to the stern. Ambel—always calm and
not prone to panic—realized Silister and Davy-bronte’s service aboard the
Treader might be limited indeed unless he could think of a way to deal with
the giant whelk. Perhaps after the Sargassum, find an island, break out the
harpoons and every other available weapon, beach the ship and ... get things
sorted. Ambel winced at the thought. Jabbing harpoons into giant leeches was
all very well, but he knew a bit about the thing following them.

Sticking a harpoon into it would not be easy. Only himself and elder crew
would be able to accomplish that, as it would be equivalent to ramming a
knitting needle into a tree, and about as effective. So what to do? As far as
he knew, only large heirodonts were capable of killing a giant whelk, and they
were massive creatures with mandibles capable of crushing rocks. Be nice to
have one of them on his side, but they spent as much time as possible down
deep where the leeches were not so thick, only ever coming up for air. And
when one did that, and any Captain spotted it, he would quickly take his ship
out of the vicinity. There were no stories of heirodonts sinking ships, but
maybe that was only because no one had survived to tell such a story. No, that
was a fancy, and he still had to find a way.

The function of the ship’s harpoons, of course, was not to kill but to
harpoon. Ambel stared into the darkness and reflected on an old old story
about another kind of giant.

* * * *

A kilometre behind the Treader, the giant whelk experienced a bowel-loosening
moment which clouded the water sufficiently for her to jet out of the
attacking heirodont’s path. The great creature cruised on with leisurely
insouciance, utterly aware that the whelk had no convenient rocks to which it
could cling. In panic the whelk released gas from her shell and began to sink,
but the bottom was a long way down and there was no guarantee there would be
stone there to which she could cling. She spread her harder tentacles out
towards the heirodont and tried to draw as much of the rest of herself as
possible into her shell. It was hopeless. By extending her tentacles she was
only offering the predator a starter to munch on. Then she saw a wisp of
something cutting starlit lines across her vision. The line from the ship, its
hook still jammed into one of her tentacles. It was strong in a way that
nothing else in the sea was, she realized, since it had managed to cut into
her flesh. Perhaps it could equally cut into the flesh of a heirodont? She
caught the end of the line and wrapped it about another tentacle, stretching
ten metres of the stuff horizontally before her.

The heirodont circled twice, lazily flicking its tail to change course. It
sighed contentedly as, deeper now, leeches began to detach from its body.
Rolling its head from side to side, as if to ease a crick in its short and
powerful neck, it began grating its mandibles together—a sound sure to strike
terror into the heart of any sea creature large enough to be lunch. Then it
turned and headed directly towards the whelk.

The whelk kept the line on target, just below the predator’s eyes. The
heirodont opened its mandibles wide, the black bony plates in its mouth
clashing together like a row of sliding doors. It hit the line and suddenly
the whelk was hurtling backwards through the sea, mandibles clashing only
twenty metres away from her. Then she was rising.

The heirodont shook its massive head, a trail of juices oozing from where the
line cut in. The whelk rode up over its head and then bounced down the length
of its back, getting cracked once by the huge tail on its way past. She spun,
spread her skirt to stabilize herself. The heirodont turned hard and circled
round again. The whelk eyed her tentacle where the line had bitten in but not
cut through, unwrapped that length of line and shifted it to undamaged flesh,
and held the rest of the line out again. The heirodont drew close once more,
then abruptly turned away. The whelk felt new terror; it had spotted the line.
Now began a long and horrible duel: feint upon feint, attacks defeated, the
heirodont increasingly maddened by the deep cuts to its head. But the whelk
was learning, and soon began to see a way.

The fifth attack, from above, went much the same as before. The line cut in
below the heirodont’s mandibles. As it shook its head, the whelk swung round
to fall past the side of the head, only this time she reached out with her
other tentacles to grasp the heirodont’s hard armoured breast. This was
something utterly new to the predator: whelks normally wanted to get away as
fast as possible, not cling on. It accelerated, flicking its tail hard from
side to side, and rolling to try to shake off the unwanted passenger. Using
all the strength in her tentacles the whelk began hauling herself up and
round. Behind the heirodont’s head, she gripped hard and sucked down. Now the
heirodont was panicking. The whelk uncoiled one end of the line, flung it
around her attacker’s neck, finally managed to snag it on the other side.
Again coiling the line around her tentacle, she drew it taut around the
beast’s throat, then began to pull.

The heirodont suddenly stopped shaking itself and headed for the surface.
Hundreds of tonnes of heirodont, plus many tonnes of whelk, rose high into the
night. The enormous tail thrashed the waves for a second, then the two crashed
down again. But the whelk did not lose her grip.

Aboard the ship, only a few hundred metres away, Captain Ambel gripped the
Trader’s rail as the wave hit. He was the oldest of Old Captains, and thought
he’d seen all this ocean had to offer.

‘Fuck me sideways,’ he muttered.

* * * *

A low boom reverberated through the ship and Janer stumbled aside as the floor
tilted, and caught himself against a rack of dowelling rods. Other items here
in the maintenance section, where Ron had brought them in search of further
weapons, crashed to the floor.

‘The rudder,’ said Captain Ron. He took a comlink from his belt and spoke into
it: ‘Garl, what happened?’

A voice replied, ‘Just lost the helm—no response. The rudder’s right round and
I’m getting all sorts of red lights up here.’

‘Tell Zephyr to take off sail. I’ll get back to you.’ He put the comlink back
on his belt and nodded ahead to where armed reifications were scrambling up
one ladder from the bilge. By the sound, others were also scrambling up a
ladder further along. ‘Looks like the battle ain’t going too well.’ Rapping a
knuckle against the floating drone, he added, ‘Go take a look, Thirteen. Let
me know what’s going on.’

The drone shot forward, then down through the opening out of which the ladder
looped. Kladites, now in the maintenance section, were crowding past to head
for the mast stairwells. Janer eased along a partition wall, grabbed the
ladder rail and pulled himself round so he could peer down. Bloc’s people were
ascending one behind the other, from all the way down. He stepped back out of
their way.

‘What’s happening?’ Ron asked, snagging a shrivelled man bare of a helmet.

The man stared at him, eyes flat black photo-receptors, mouth opening and
closing. ‘It’s hunting us now,’ he said, the movements of his mouth bearing no
relation to his words.

‘What did you expect?’ the Captain asked, puzzled.

‘Aesop,’ said Janer, pointing to the ladder.

Ron released the black-eyed reif, waded through the crowd, then caught hold of
Aesop by the scruff and hauled him from the ladder.

‘What happened down there?’ Ron asked.

Aesop continued to struggle, saying nothing. Then abruptly he froze. ‘It is,
it is . . .’ His voice changed and he went on almost calmly, ‘The hooder
somehow managed to get aboard. We only just discovered it. I. . . Bloc sent us
down to see what we could do.’

‘Did someone use explosives down there? The rudder’s damaged.’

‘We ... do not know.’

Hooded and masked, Bones now appeared, standing just behind Aesop.

‘Well, we can’t just leave it down there,’ said Ron. He released Aesop, and
the reif sped away, Bones scuttling after him.

As the ladder cleared, Janer asked Ron, ‘What do you suggest?’

Ron scratched his head thoughtfully. ‘Seems we got little choice. We gotta fry
that bugger before it sends us to the bottom.’ He turned to Forlam. ‘You, take
five of the boys and find Bloc. We want Batian weapons—I’m sure he recovered
some. Get them and meet us back here soon as you can.’

Forlam pointed at five of his fellows, and was about to head off.

‘I’ll come too,’ said a male reif, stepping forwards. ‘I might be able to
help.’

Ron now led them away from the hatch, and through the maintenance section to a
locked bulkhead door. He palmed the plate beside it, and it opened. In the
next section he walked over to a cage. Janer moved aside as the remaining
Hoopers crowded past him. Wade stepped up to stand beside him.

‘The Captain has a problem,’ the Golem observed, ‘and I wonder if it is one he
can solve.’

‘Old Captains are very capable,’ Janer replied. He nodded towards Ron as the

Captain studied the cage lock, shrugged, then tore off the barred door.

‘I’m sure that is so. But a hooder is a very dangerous creature that is very
difficult to kill. Most projectile weapons would kill this ship before killing
the beast itself. The same rule applies to most beam weapons.’

‘You’re just a little ray of sunshine, aren’t you,’ said Janer.

As if he had not heard, Wade continued, ‘I have my APW which I can fire very
very accurately—accurately enough not to damage this ship. There is, however,
a weapon perfectly suited to this situation. It is highly illegal in the
Polity, because it is both hugely destructive and there is absolutely no
material defence against it.’ He eyed Janer.

Janer considered all sorts of denials, but you did not hide the stolen fire
extinguisher when the house was burning. Obviously Wade knew all about the
weapon Janer carried.

‘Let’s go,’ he said, more courageously than he felt, and turned to head back
along through the maintenance section.

Wade caught his shoulder and redirected him. ‘Down the ladder here. Our friend
is no longer at the stern. He is directly below us.’

* * * *

As Forlam led the way to the deck, he felt there was something familiar about
the male reif accompanying them. Then he dismissed the thought—live long
enough and everyone starts to look familiar, and he had more important things
to consider. People were being killed aboard this ship, and reifications were
being . . . sort of killed. Of course reifs did not feel pain, so he dismissed
them from his thoughts. But how Sturmbul must have suffered. Forlam had been
very interested to hear from Isis Wade earlier how hooders fed. He walked on
with his stomach lurching with an excitement he felt loath to identify.

Climbing up on the lamplit deck he glanced up and saw that all the fabric
sails were now reefed. The Golem sail was just discernible up its mast,
silhouetted like an iron statue against the starlit sky. One of the living
sails was on the midship deckhouse. Forlam could not guess why it would be
there until he saw its head dart down, a pinkish tail thrash into view, then
the head jerk back tearing up a mouthful of flesh. Huff was dismembering a
rhinoworm and chomping it down.

‘This looks interesting, Forlam,’ said the reif.

Dragging his attention away from the sail, Forlam glanced round at him, then
peered along the deck to where he was pointing. A large group of people had
gathered in a clear area of deck between the fore and mid deckhouses.

‘Do I know you,’ Forlam asked him as he studied the group.

‘No, you don’t.’

‘You know my name.’

‘I make it a point of remembering the names of those who might present a
problem to myself and others.’

‘What the fuck is that supposed to mean? And who are you?’ He did sort of know
what the reif meant but, like the excitement he felt, did not want to analyse
it too closely. He knew he had never been quite right since that time the
Skinner had torn out most of his guts, and his subsequent change.

The group ahead consisted of milling Kladites, amongst them Bloc and the just
arrived Aesop and Bones. Though he felt misgivings, Forlam began trotting
towards them. He had his Captain’s orders after all. The reif kept pace with
him, moving without that usual jerkiness Forlam associated with his kind.

‘My name is John Styx.’

You’re lying.

‘Well, John Styx, my Captain tells me I’m more of a danger to myself.’ Forlam
gritted his teeth.

‘I thought your fascination with pain less focused than that.’

Forlam was about to demand an explanation of that, but now they were getting
near to the group.

Bloc suddenly noticed them and stepped forward. ‘What is this?’

Forlam launched into an explanation. ‘Can’t have a hooder running about below.
It’s already damaged the rudder. We need weapons badly. The Captain wants to
know where you stowed those Batian weapons?’

After a pause, Bloc said, ‘All personnel not on duty should return to their
cabins.’

‘What?’ said Forlam, excitement suddenly turning to anger.

Bloc continued, ‘This is not the concern of Hoopers. We will deal with the
problem as we see fit.’ The reif’s eye irrigators were currently attempting to
drown his face.

John Styx stepped forward and spoke up. ‘I think the matter is somewhat more
urgent then you would suppose. The rudder is jammed over and we are now
adrift. If this ship rams an atoll or a packetworm coral . . .’

Bloc seemed taken aback by that, for a long moment passed before he said, ‘I
am aware of the damage to the rudder, which was caused by a misguided attempt
to use a grenade against the hooder. But the matter needs some consideration,
since charging in there with Batian weapons might result in even further
damage. As to the ship ramming an atoll . . .’ Bloc gestured to the lack of
sail. ‘It is drifting now and the damage would be minimal.’

He’s delaying, thought Forlam. Why is this shit delaying?

‘Far as I see it,’ he said belligerently, ‘you are the owner, but Captain Ron
is in charge here, and he’s ordered me to fetch weapons. We need those Batian
weapons.’

‘It would be safer, I think, if you returned to your cabins,’ Bloc replied.

Forlam stepped forward too. ‘Listen, you worm, that hooder has to be dealt
with. I don’t care about your fucking god complex. I don’t care about these
brown-nosing deadbeats with their noses up your anus. My Captain wants those
weapons and you’ll either give them to us or we’ll go over you to find them!’

Now Bloc took a pace forwards. His movements were jerky, his eye irrigators
strangely still. ‘You ... will... do as you are told!’

Forlam was about to protest further when Styx laid a hand on his shoulder.
‘Perhaps—’ he began. There came a shuddering crash which sent Forlam and Styx
staggering. Some Kladites fell to the deck, and Bloc went down on his
backside.

‘Atoll?’ Styx suggested brightly.

* * * *

‘What the hell!’

Janer stayed where he had fallen on the catwalk below the ladder as the ship
swayed underneath him. Wade hopped down off the ladder—he of course had not
fallen. The Golem stooped down and offered a hand, and hauled Janer to his
feet.

‘Maybe we’ve run aground,’ suggested Wade. ‘That doesn’t affect our task.’

‘Mmph,’ was Janer’s only response, but his reservations grew as they moved on
into the bilge. After having seen a hooder in the flesh for the first time on
Mortuary Island, he agreed with Ron: nasty bugger. Perhaps they should have
waited for Ron and the rest. Perhaps he should have handed his weapon over to
someone more handy.

‘Who is this individual you must apprise of certain truths, and what is the
cataclysm you want to prevent?’ he asked.

‘We make enough noise and we attract the hooder,’ said Wade.

‘Well, we didn’t come down here to avoid it,’ Janer replied.

Wade glanced at him. ‘A point, a definite point.’

‘So perhaps while we search you can explain yourself.’ Janer now had his
weapon in his hand, as did Wade.

‘Should I even try? I’m the evil agent of a hive mind come here to do some
dastardly deed. What was it? Oh yes, obtain sprine so my master’s hornets can
carry it in their stings and dominate this planet.’

‘That about sums it up,’ said Janer. ‘It would also explain your interest in a
submersible kitted out for removing the bile ducts from ocean-going leeches.’

They were now on a walkway. Just ahead of them lay a jumble of bones and reif
joint motors. An eye irrigator was spraying intermittently into the empty
socket of a stripped skull. Wade prodded at the reif wreckage with his toe.

‘You know, this one is only dead in his or her own terms. I have to wonder
what this individual’s reaction would be if its crystal was reawakened in a
Golem chassis. Would this one choose to be shut down again and have its
crystal destroyed?’

‘Probably not,’ said Janer, peering into the distant reaches of the bilge.

‘Yes, death as a matter of degree. Strange times we live in.’

Janer let that one ride. He could not make much out of it. Instead he said,
‘The hive mind I worked for wanted sprine so it could dominate this world. And
it seemed likely that, had it succeeded, Polity AIs would not have minded that
much. Sprine hornets would have acted as a counterbalance to the
indestructibility of Hoopers.’

‘That is not the case now ... if it ever was,’ replied Wade.

‘What?’

Wade held a finger up to his lips and Janer fell silent. He could hear nothing
unusual, but that did not mean the Golem could not.

After a moment he whispered, ‘What’s it doing?’

‘I suspect it is feeding. Unusual that. On their home planet the prey must
remain alive to prevent certain poisons being released from the inedible to
the edible portions of its body.’

‘Nice,’ said Janer.

‘Very much not nice for the prey. But why has the hooder behaved the way it
has here? At the encampment it was similarly maddened, though it did feed as
it should, on a couple of occasions. It was starved, but I don’t think that
accounts for this.’

Janer stared at Wade’s profile. The damned Golem was leading him away from the
subject. ‘What, precisely, is not the case now?’

Wade turned to him. ‘The Polity no longer needs sprine hornets as a
counterbalance to Hoopers.’

‘Why not?’

‘Supposing it to be true that they ever did, then it’s because there is a
small population of alien sentients on this planet who would be in danger of
being wiped out by those same hornets. However, I question your assertion:
what about boosted and mechanically augmented humans, or those loaded to Golem
shells? Where is their counterbalance?’

‘So you’re not here after the sprine?’ Janer at least wanted to be clear on
that.

‘Why come here for it?’

‘It’s also obtainable off-planet?’

Wade rubbed his forefinger against the bridge of his nose—a very human
gesture. ‘Do you think for one moment that the leech genome is unknown to
Polity AIs? Do you think, as a corollary, that they do not also know the
formula for sprine?’

‘That doesn’t mean that hive minds know it.’

‘No, not unless they happened to decode it from any of the millions of samples
of leech flesh that have been taken off-world, or have managed to steal it
from secure storage.’

Was he to believe this? It all sounded perfectly plausible, but then Janer
would not expect a lie from this Golem hive-mind agent to be implausible. And
anyway, if Wade did consider Janer’s knowledge and suspicions a threat, why
hadn’t he already neutralized that threat? Or was that why they were down here
now?

Janer slowed his pace to allow Wade to get ahead of him. The Golem stepped
down a few steps, out of the previous unroofed corridor onto a grated walkway.
Up ahead now, Janer could hear movement. Something big and hard-edged was
travelling rapidly across a wooden floor.

‘I’m not sure I believe you, or can afford to believe you.’ said Janer.

Now ten paces ahead, Wade turned to face him. ‘I am not any danger to the
people of this world. I understand its exigencies. I realize why sprine is so
valuable to them.’

What the hell was he talking about?

Janer raised his weapon and aimed it straight at Wade’s chest.

‘You’re a tourist then?’ he asked.

‘Not really. When we have time I will tell you why I am here. We no longer
have the time now.’

The noise was louder now: hard carapace on metal, gratings rattling. Something
so big should not move so fast. Darkness rose behind Wade, rows of red eyes
glared and multiple sickle limbs clattered together, as if sharpening each
other. Maybe this was the solution to all Janer’s qualms.

When he was ready, he pulled the trigger.

* * * *

Bloc did not know if his anger was real, or some feedback through that now
fully functional third channel. Nevertheless, he felt it burning red inside
his mind, dislocated from the functions of glands but emulating them all the
same. But it only revealed itself in the fidgety movement of Aesop and Bones
as it spilled through his links to them.

OUTPARAFUNCT . . . WARN: EXTREMITY PROBE . . . B.P. LOAD . . .

MEMSPACE: 00030

He shut off the messages conflicting with his vision and hauled himself to his
feet. This could have been avoided had he gained full control of the hooder
before bringing it here. However, gaining full control of it, through the
spider thralls implanted in each segment of its body, had required programming
similar in function to the way a shepherd controlled his sheepdog. The
whistles and hand signals were given when the animal naturally did what would
later be required of it: one whistle for left, another for right, others for
come here, or go there. The animal mind, connecting sound and action, would
then carry out those actions in response to the whistles. But some willingness
was required on the part of the animal itself. The hooder was not so willing,
and it was difficult to prevent this particular dog biting the sheep. It had
attacked the Kladites he had sent down to finish off any of Ellanc Strone’s
followers who had escaped. But now he was beginning to gain control of the
beast—he was returning it to the chain lockers in the bow—and these people now
wanted to destroy it. All this would not have been required but for the
obstinacy and selfishness of. . . people. He had done his best for them
all—had always done his best. It was the fault of those who interfered with
his plans, those who tried to halt his progress in every respect. His gaze
returned to Forlam, then he strode forward with his two shadows close behind
him.

‘Men! To me!’ he shouted, and did not need to look round to know his little
army was gathering round him and unlimbering their weapons. ‘It is time now
for some lessons to be learnt. You,’ he stabbed a finger at Forlam, ‘are an
employee, as is your Captain. You will obey me or know the consequences, as
will he. I control everything that happens aboard this ship.’

‘Like you control Aesop and Bones?’ suggested the male reif.

Bloc felt something lurch inside him. Was this one of Ellanc Strone’s rebels?
He did not know the man.

‘Your meaning?’ He continued staring at Forlam.

The six Hoopers here carried a few weapons, but those were nothing in
comparison to the forty or so laser carbines at his back. Thinning out their
number might be beneficial, as would destroying any reif who knew too much.

‘Prador thrall technology,’ said Styx bluntly.

‘Really,’ said Bloc, turning towards him.

Styx nodded towards Aesop and Bones. ‘I knew it had to be something like that.
I researched your background before coming here, and I know where your
interests lie. Most of the other passengers do too. It does not really concern
us, so long as you bring us to the Little Flint and our chance at
resurrection.’ Styx stepped closer, placed a hand against Forlam’s chest and
pushed him back. ‘Ellanc Strone and his kind are in the minority.’ Styx turned
and looked at Forlam. ‘Bloc is right, don’t you see? Those weapons were no
help to the Batians, so even in the hands of Hoopers what good would they do?
And Forlam here should perhaps try to show a little self-control.’

Forlam suddenly looked decidedly uncomfortable. He glanced round at the
Hoopers behind him, then forwards at the armed Kladites.

‘Yeah,’ he said grudgingly.

Bloc felt himself growing calm. There was no need here for any demonstrations
of power. The Hoopers were needed for repairs and for running this ship, his
Kladites were armed, and in time he would gain full control of the hooder.

He turned to Forlam. ‘The rudder is damaged?’

‘Yes,’ said Forlam, eyeing the laser carbines pointed at him.

Bloc wished he could smile now. ‘Return to Captain Ron, find out what is
required, and tell him to get repairs underway.’ He swung towards Styx. ‘All
nonessential personnel should return to their cabins for the duration of this
crisis.’

‘There’s still that nasty bugger down there,’ said Forlam sulkily.

‘The hooder, my people have told me,’ said Bloc, ‘is heading towards the bows.
It will probably return to the chain lockers where it was hiding earlier.’

The male reif was the first to turn round and walk away. Forlam and the
Hoopers followed.

* * * *

The gun, though given a long pompous title by its inventor, holofiction
labelled a singun. Very few people believed such a weapon existed, and of
those only a small percentage actually knew it existed. It made no sound and
there was no kick. Automatically ranging the first solid object at which it
was aimed, it caused a mote of quantum foam in that object to begin turning
out of phase with reality. This resulted in a hole which in turn generated a
powerful singularity with an existence so brief its gravity field did not get
a chance to propagate beyond a few metres. Everything within its sphere of
influence was subjected to both tidal and crushing forces of the gravitic
shell while it revolved out of reality then back into it. The result was
inevitably messy.

The cowl of the hooder—all black and red and glittering razor
edges—disappeared and reappeared in an instant too brief to register. There
came a whumph, as of a one-tonne melon cast into a giant food processor. The
mangled mess of carapace, woody flesh and organic glass cascaded to the floor,
leaving the headless body of the monster thrashing in the bilge. Wade walked
away from it, back towards Janer.

‘An effective weapon,’ said the Golem.

‘Certainly is,’ said Janer, gingerly holstering his gun.

‘You’re not going to use it on me, then?’ Wade asked.

‘Not for the present,’ Janer replied.

* * * *

Now, Bloc decided, he would institute a disciplined regime aboard this ship.
The Hoopers would make the necessary repairs; the reifications, without Ellanc
Strone any longer to act as a rabble rouser, would only come out on deck as
per the present rota—except for his Kladites and any other reifs he could
persuade to join his army. The Kladites would act as his enforcers, but for
any major revolt they might not be able to handle he could use the hooder ...
as soon as he gained full control of it. Bloc was well satisfied with this
night’s work, but his satisfaction lasted only as long as it took Forlam and
the others to move out of sight.

Suddenly, a wave of feedback slammed shrieking into Bloc’s mind through the
channel open to the hooder. He felt the linkages to the thralls down below
breaking up. The hooder—someone had killed his pet! His mind filled with a
morass of pseudo-pain. The third channel continued operating, but flashing
through to him cryptic signals from remaining functional thralls. It was all
to much. Bloc could feel his grip slipping, and he staggered back, bouncing
off Bones, then falling against the nearby wall.

OUTPARAFUNCT: B.P. LOAD INC. 10%

How quickly can power dissolve?

WARN: EXTREMITY PROBES NIL BALM LA71-94

VIRAL INFECT

To one side he saw Bones shaking as if electrocuted, then toppling over onto
the deck. Through his other channel he sensed Aesop drop as well, but could do
nothing about it. Warning messages were scrolling up before his inner vision,
one after another, and he seemed unable to shut them down. The next thing he
knew he was lying flat on his back, staring through a flood of artificial
tears at the starlit sky.

MEMSPACE: 00024

‘Taylor Bloc, sir?’

Two Kladites were bending over him, reaching to help him up. He pushed their
hands away and eventually lurched to his feet by himself. Everything was
fizzing in his mind, and he could make no connections. No, he must not lose it
now. He pushed the two Kladites back further, straightened up and looked
around.

Bones and Aesop were down. Unbelievably, the hooder was gone. How had Captain
Ron just done what the Batians failed to do? Bloc needed time to retrench, but
he needed even more to show he was still in control.

‘Those two.’ He pointed at Aesop and Bones. ‘Take them to the Tank Rooms and
tell Erlin to do what she can for them. I will be in my cabin.’

He turned and walked away, all effort focused on controlling his limbs.

* * * *

13

Prill:
this sickle-legged creature is something of an oddity. Below a saucer-shaped
carapace its ten legs are spaced evenly, and all hinge in the same concentric
direction. These legs are flat and sharp, and in the water act like some
strange cross between propellers and paddles. On land, though it can travel
forward at great speed, it is constantly revolving. As a consequence, so it
can keep its eyes on its destination—usually something to eat—its red eyeballs
are not directly attached to its optic nerve, which lies in a band around its
very small brain, but are squeezed around a lubricated channel in its carapace
rim, constantly focusing light on the band of nerve tissue behind. The mouth
is positioned centrally, underneath.

Prill lay millions of eggs in the ocean currents. Drifting, they hatch out
diatomic prill, which make up part of the vicious plankton. Feeding in the
ocean currents for some years, until they are about the size of dinner plates,
they hitch a ride on larger oceanic carnivores, scavenging scraps from their
host’s prey. As they get larger their bodies become more dense, till they

eventually sink to the ocean floor, where they continue growing. Eventually
internal body growth outpaces carapace growth, so they themselves become prey
to the smaller denizens of the deep. Their carapaces and internal chemistry
prevent virus infection, so prill will live no longer than a century or so. In
this respect their closest relation is the glister—

Four fusion plants were now running. Two others were possibly salvageable, but
one was highly radioactive and beyond repair. Through various cameras Vrell
watched a dying blank plasma-cutting the supports and pipes around the
pill-shaped unrecoverable one. Eventually it was hanging loose, only attached
by its S-con cables, with coolant leaking out of a breach in its side. These
cables being a nightmare to cut using heat, as they instantly conducted it
away, the blank had to cut through with an electric saw, and eventually the
two-metre-wide plant dropped to the deck with a crash. Stumbling a little now,
the sickly blank attached a cable hook to one of the support lugs on the
fallen object’s circumference. Using the electric winch of a rail buggy out in
the main corridor, he hauled it out of the fusion room, then up off the floor
so that it hung suspended from the buggy, which in turn clung to its ceiling
rail. It was a labour-intensive task which would have been greatly simplified
by using a mobile gravplate. Except the Warden might detect AG usage and
investigate.

From the control room Vrell set the buggy moving, with the blank walking along
behind it. After many laborious interchanges and a nightmarish moment when the
rail began to tear away from the side of a down-shaft through which it curved,
both blank and plant eventually arrived in the drone cache. There, Vrell’s
drone unfolded its new armoured claws, took the weight of the plant and
snipped the cable holding it aloft. Vrell closed the door into the cache, then
opened the hull door. In flooded the ocean, slamming the blank against the
back wall. Vrell relinquished control of the human, then watched the cache
fill up and the drone take the fusion plant outside to dump it. Some hours
later the drone returned, grabbed the still moving blank and shoved him
outside too. Finally Vrell closed the hull door again. Despite being a tough
Hooper, the human was dying anyway from the huge radiation dose it had
received. Vrell concentrated now on other matters.

The remaining human blanks were working very well: all automated repair
systems were operating at optimum efficiency and, just as fast as they were
supplied with materials, the manufactories were turning out missiles,
explosives and other components to restock the armouries. There were now
enough gravplates operational to waft the ship into orbit. All the steering
thrusters were functional, and their tanks a quarter full of deuterium oxide.
The main fusion engine was not yet ready but, at the rate his blanks worked,
it would be so in a few days. However, even all this activity was but a small
percentage of the overall task. There now remained the most complex and
bewildering job of all, which, if left undone, meant Vrell would never be
leaving this system. And the repair and realignment of the U-space engine was
not a task the Prador could delegate.

The Prador left his sanctum for the first time in many days, making his way

towards the ship’s rear. On the way he collected a maglev tool chest and reels
of fibre-optics and insulated super-conducting cable. The U-space engine was
positioned in a wide chamber just ahead of the main fusion engines. In
appearance it was a large torus stretched until the hole in its middle had
closed up. It was supported in a scaffold that also carried a fountain of
S-con power cables, fibre-optic control and diagnostic feeds. Around the
room’s walls were scattered banks of hexagonal screens and pit consoles. Vrell
eyed the layer of soot on every surface, the burnt cables and blown U-field
monitors. The engine itself bore no exterior signs of physical damage, but
until he replaced those burnt-out optics he did not know how it was inside.

Vrell advanced into the room, the tool chest following him faithfully. He
reached out to turn off the chest’s power, and it settled with a crunch on the
ashy floor. Rearing up over the engine, he extended his manipulatory hands and
detached an optic cable. He then opened the tool chest, used a vibro-sheer to
cut an equivalent length from one reel, selected the required fittings from
the chest, and sealed them to each end with optical glue. After replacing the
cable he marked it with a coloured wire tie. And so it went. Some cables
appeared undamaged, but he still replaced them all. Next, using a similar
technique, he replaced all the S-con cables. These ail appeared undamaged, but
he dared not trust their insulation, as the current they would need to carry
was huge, and the slightest short could spell disaster. In a storeroom just
off the engine room, he found spare U-field monitors and replaced the damaged
ones. Once all this was done, he moved well back, linked in to the ship’s
control systems, and switched on the power.

The whole room seemed to twist slightly, and suddenly the U-space engine
appeared to gain greater weight and substance. Vrell moved to a bank of
screens and pit controls and initiated the optic aligning program, since it
was impossible for each cable to go back precisely in position, for they
contained tens of thousands of microscopic individual filaments. While this
was running, he headed off to the ship’s larder and fed himself, noting as he
did so that supplies of food were getting low. By the time he returned, the
program had run its course and he was now getting diagnostic returns. He
inspected the screen readouts for a long time, then abruptly turned and
knocked the tool chest across the room, to smash into another bank of screens.
Then he settled down onto the ashy floor, with a hiss like something
deflating.

* * * *

Forlam flushed with embarrassment. Styx, himself and just five other Hoopers
up against Bloc, Aesop, Bones and a small army of Kladites—what had he been
thinking? He could easily have got them all killed. The obvious reason for
such rashness was those unhealthy impulses to which Styx had referred earlier.

‘Sorry about that,’ he muttered.

‘No matter,’ said Styx. ‘Just try to control yourself.’

‘Yeah, right.’

They reached the door to the nearest Mainmast stairwell, and clattered down to
the reifications’ deck. Once there, Forlam turned to head for the stern.
Captain Ron, in his own calm and lugubrious manner, would have to deal
directly with Bloc. Maybe they could open the embarkation stair and lure the
hooder there and somehow force it out into the ocean. Maybe Erlin could sort
something out, since she was clever . . .

Styx abruptly caught hold of his shoulder. ‘Not that way,’ said the reif.

Forlam stared at him, puzzled.

‘Don’t you want to fetch those weapons for your Captain?’ Styx asked him.

‘Well . . . yes.’

‘Then follow me.’

Styx broke into a lope that was surprisingly smooth for a reif, leading the
way towards the bows. Some other reifications were crowding the corridor, and
from them one female reif approached him.

‘What’s happening?’ she asked.

‘I haven’t the time to explain right now, Santen,’ Styx replied. ‘Suffice to
say that I think Bloc has dealt with a particular problem of his in a way that
endangers us all.’

What is he on about? Forlam wondered, as he followed Styx on through the
crowd. The female reif hesitated for a moment, then abruptly followed. Shortly
they reached the stairwell by the third foremast, which led up eventually to
the bridge.

‘We have to be quick,’ said Styx. ‘Bloc and the others may be coming back
here.’

Soon they reached the doorway leading through to the staterooms on this level.
Styx peered through the porthole in the door. ‘Two Kladites, armed. Deal with
them, Forlam.’

‘Right.’ Forlam glanced around at his five companions. ‘Come on, lads.’

Forlam crashed through the door, saw the two guards turning towards him. He
launched himself at the nearest one, grabbing the reif’s carbine and driving
his head into the guard’s face. Hands slipping from his weapon the guard
staggered back against the wall, while Forlam brought its butt up hard into
his face. The other guard managed to fire just one blast, then disappeared
under three Hoopers. The one Forlam had hit was struggling to get upright
again.

‘Tie them up,’ said Styx. ‘You won’t be able to knock dead men unconscious.’

Sufficient belts and straps were found, and shortly the two Kladites were
writhing about on the floor, leaking blue balm from their injuries.

‘You,’ Styx pointed to one of the Hoopers, ‘go watch the stair.’ He then
strode down the corridor, checking each door before halting at one. ‘Forlam,
here.’

Forlam kicked hard, his foot going right through the woodwork. ‘Bugger.’

Styx relieved him of the carbine, as he struggled to free his leg, and fired
into the lock. After Forlam pulled himself free, he slammed his palm against
the door above the smoking lock. It swung slowly inwards.

‘I’ll be damned,’ said Forlam. ‘How did you know?’

On the big wide bed rested a neat row of Batian projectile weapons, stacks of
ammunition, energy canisters and grenades. It was the missile launcher that
caught Forlam’s eye, however.

‘I knew because I watch and I listen.’ Styx turned to the female reif. ‘It
always surprises me how much most people miss.’

‘Oh I missed it at first, but not now,’ said Santen Marcollian.

Styx just stared at her. Forlam knew he was missing something about this
exchange between the two, but ignored them to take up the launcher and eye it
greedily.

‘You be careful with that,’ said Styx.

The Hoopers collected the weapons, making a bag for them out of bed sheets,
and were soon piling out of the room. Forlam shouldered the launcher and
watched as Styx walked around the double bed and picked up something that had
fallen on the floor. It was a plasmel box, and he opened it. Inside were four
divisions, one of them empty. From one of the others he removed an aerosol can
of some kind, no label, slightly dented. He sniffed it in a very unreif-like
manner.

‘This was the stateroom assigned to Aesop,’ he said, ‘though he never uses it.
Such luxury is wasted on the dead.’

‘Someone coming up!’ came a shout from the Hooper watching the stairwell.

Styx nodded briefly, led the way out of the room and along to the other
stairwell, then down.

* * * *

Travelling under the ocean at what would be Mach 1 if airborne, Sniper
followed the silt trail for a hundred kilometres before it faded into the
normal background micro-debris of the ocean. Shutting off his S-cav drive, he
coasted for a time while assessing collected data. Obviously the ocean
currents would have shifted the trail, but how far? The war drone overlaid the
present silt trail on his internal map of the sea bottom. Then, taking into
account the ocean currents and tides, he tracked this trail’s position back
day by day. The twisting line deformed, grew wider to account for possible
error, but still—at a point in time a few days after the disappearance of the
Vignette—it seemed to match some seabed features. Sniper turned, opened up
with his drive, and returned with all speed to the spot where the spaceship
had originally rested.

‘What you doing?’ asked Twelve from above.

‘The silt trail is just about gone, but I’ve plotted its original location.
I’ll follow it and see if I can get into our friend’s thinking.’

‘Oh, right,’ said Twelve, with more than a hint of boredom.

Propelled by his tractor drive, without the S-cav field engaged, Sniper
followed the winding trail he had configured along the ocean’s bottom. After
fifty kilometres of this and two dead leeches, he still could not plumb the
Prador’s thinking. Apparently it was heading towards the Lamarck Trench, but
then it would have needed to circle back round the Skinner’s Island to go
anywhere else. Then Sniper picked up a sudden surge from his magnetometer as
he detected something far off to one side. He turned to trace the source,
travelling two kilometres away from his current course. Finding only a piece
of Ebulan’s ship which, judging by its encrustations, must have fallen away
prior to it crashing ten years ago, he cursed repeatedly as he returned. It
was only as he motored back through his own silt trail that he realized the
Prador had made a compromise between depth and silt disturbance along the most
direct route leading to the trench. It had clearly never expected any of this
trail to last long enough to be followed.

‘He’s definitely gone to ground in the trench,’ Sniper sent.

‘That’s good,’ sighed Twelve.

‘What are your intentions?’ the Warden interrupted.

‘Well, this trail will only show me where he entered the trench, not where he
is positioned now. Reaching it, he could have turned either left or right, or
even into one of the tributaries. My chances of finding him are the same from
wherever I begin my search. What can you give me?’

‘The geosurvey drones would not be able to sustain the pressure, and Thirteen
is presently otherwise occupied. You will have to make do with Eleven and
Twelve.’

‘You don’t seem that anxious to find this bastard—and its bastard drone.’

‘This bastard probably just wants to leave the planet, and though the loss of
the Vignette crew is lamentable, it does not warrant major intervention on my
part. Anyway, this may soon no longer be our concern.’

‘What?’ Sniper asked, then grunted almost physically as he began to decode the
information package the Warden sent. ‘I see,’ the drone muttered. ‘We just got
shat on all the way from Earth.’

* * * *

Janer studied the still-shifting remains of the hooder and wondered who was
now in charge of the Sable Keech. About ten Kladites were now little more than
piles of bones and reification hardware. The Hoopers waiting all around him
were now well armed.

‘Steady, boys,’ said Ron, standing up at the sound of marching across the deck
above.

The thirty or so Hoopers down here looked steady enough to Janer.

The Kladites started descending the two nearby ladders. A group of about
twenty gradually gathered at the base of each, then milled around confusedly
when they saw what awaited them.

‘Shall we do ‘em?’ asked Forlam eagerly. It seemed he was anxious to try out
his new toy.

‘No,’ said Ron, ‘we’ll just make sure our position is clear, then get on with
the work we’re being paid for.’

Taylor Bloc, carefully checking his hand- and footholds, finally worked his
way down the ladder.

‘Looks a little shaky,’ opined Wade.

The Kladites parted to allow their leader through, then fell into ranks behind
him. A few metres from Ron, the reif halted. He turned to stare at the remains

of the hooder.

‘How was it killed?’ Bloc asked.

‘Well,’ said Ron, ‘I reckon whoever originally hit it with the APW came and
finished the job this time. Never saw what happened myself. I was waiting for
Forlam to bring us these weapons.’

‘I see,’ said Bloc, eyeing the gathered Hoopers, only a few of whom did not
carry some of the hardware Forlam and Styx had obtained from Aesop’s
stateroom. ‘Does anyone know who owns this APW?’

A general shaking and scratching of heads was all the reply he received.

‘So it would seem the present crisis is over.’ Bloc glanced back at his own
men, then around at the Hoopers. To Janer it seemed the reif was weighing the
odds. Laser carbines against Hoopers armed with Batian weapons: it seemed that
Bloc did not rate his chances very high. ‘I don’t want any further trouble. We
have already had . . . sufficient.’

‘That’s fine by me,’ said Ron pleasantly. ‘We’ve got work to do now if this
ship is not to founder,’ Ron looked beyond Bloc to his gathered Kladites, ‘and
more trouble would just mean more mess for us to clean up.’

Bloc did not turn or say anything out loud, but his people began heading back
towards the ladders. After a moment he followed them. Forlam and many of the
other Hoopers appeared slightly disappointed by this retreat.

‘I would dearly love to pull his head off,’ muttered Ron.

Stepping out of the shadows behind, John Styx said, ‘I understand your
feelings, Captain Ron, but his attempt to prevent you obtaining weapons that
would have proved ineffective against this creature hardly seems sufficient
justification.’

‘Yes, I guess so.’

Styx held up a battered spray can and inspected it. ‘Patience—I think we will

know soon enough,’ he said.

Ron sighed. ‘Okay, let’s go to work then.’

* * * *

Just two ships were in sight: one moored to a clump of sargassum, the other
heeled over and heading away. Ambel recognized the moored ship as the Moby
(which it was generally called rather than by its recorded name of Moby’s
Dick) at just the same time as he recognized the figure on her bridge staring
back at him through binoculars. After the loss of his ship Ahab the other
Captains had pooled their resources to buy Captain Drum another vessel, for in
sinking his own ship, which contained a Prador CTD, Drum had saved all their
lives. Many said that Drum, who had been implanted with a spider thrall that
he ejected from his body before sinking his vessel, was now slightly mad and
dangerous to know. Ambel, who had lived through experiences more nightmarish
even than that, thought this criticism unfair, for in reality it was a
description that applied to all Hoopers. ‘Take her in. We’ll anchor just off
the Moby and pay a visit,’ he told Boris.

Boris eyed him. ‘What about our friend?’ The helmsman still did not quite
believe Ambel’s story about a Whelkus titanicus attacking a heirodont. But
then a whelk managing to pursue a ship as far as it had was an unlikely story
in itself.

‘We’ve seen no sign of it, and the turbul and boxies have been behaving
normally. I reckon if it survived the heirodont, it probably lost our trail.’

‘You’d bet on that, Captain?’ Boris asked.

Ambel patted him on the shoulder. ‘We can’t live our lives expecting that
thing to turn up all the time, lad.’

Boris nodded and spun the helm. The Treader heeled over and after a while
Galegrabber furled himself along with fabric sails. Just ahead of them a mass
of sargassum floated on the ocean: rotting woody stalks and wadded ribbons of
weed. A couple of hammer whelks occupied it, but nothing else. Any prill there
had no doubt been disposed of by Drum’s crew, for the Moby was moored to this
mass. Ambel climbed down to the deck and walked over to the bows. There he
took up a heavy iron grapnel attached to a long coil of thick greased rope.
The ocean was too deep here for bottom anchors, and this was the only way. He
spun the grapnel over his head and released it. It arced out, trailing rope,
to thud into the weed just by the hammer whelks, sending those creatures
lolloping into the sea. Then, drawing in the slack as the Treader nosed into

the weed itself, he checked the grapnel’s hold and tied off the rope.

‘Hey up, Drum!’ Ambel bellowed. ‘Got anything cooking?’

‘Prill!’ Drum bellowed back. ‘I got prill on the menu today!’

Ambel turned to his gathering crew. ‘We won’t be staying here too long. You
two,’ he pointed at Davy-bronte and Silister standing uncertainly in the
background, ‘this may be your opportunity to catch a ride back to Chel. Drum
may have some more sailing to do, but he’ll certainly be going back that way
before we do.’ He turned to the others. ‘Anne and Boris will also come across
with me. Anne, find us a cask of seacane rum. The rest of you, get the ship’s
boat lowered.’

‘Aye, Captain,’ replied Anne, moving away. Silister and Davy-bronte, with the
help of Pillow and another junior, set about lowering the ship’s boat, while
Ambel turned his attention to Peck.

‘You’re in charge, Peck. I know you’re feeling a tad nervous,’ Ambel eyed the
shotgun Peck was clutching, ‘so it’s best you stay here and keep an eye on
things.’

Peck did just that, watching with unnerving intensity as the five scrambled
down into the boat and rowed across to the Moby.

Like most Old Captains, Drum was built like a tank, but unlike many he had
retained his hair, which he tied back into a pony tail. He was a wide-faced
individual who always had a welcoming grin for his friends. He wore it now,
but there was something unnerving about it.

‘How you doing, man?’ Ambel said, shaking Drum’s hand and looking round.

Drum’s crew was a relatively new one, as his previous crew had all been
murdered by Batian mercenaries and the adolescent Prador, Vrell. Some of them,
Ambel noticed, were from Ron’s old ship. There stood the appropriately named
Roach, a raggedy weasel of a man who was honest because no one gave him any
other choice, because he looked more untrustworthy than he actually was.
Others were gathered around a couple of braziers on which prill roasted. Some
of them were already eating: holding prill upside down on their laps with
belly plates hinged open, scooping out the fragrant contents with spoons. Many
of them, Ambel also noted, bore healing prill wounds.

‘They can be a bugger to catch intact,’ Ambel observed.

‘All you need is a little perseverance,’ said Drum, rubbing his hands
together. ‘What’s that there, then?’ He nodded to the cask Anne was carrying
on her shoulder.

‘A little gift,’ said Ron.

‘Then best we get it open! I’d guess you don’t want to hang around too long.’

Ambel raised an eyebrow. ‘Captain Sprage?’

‘Oh yes, we all know about your rescue mission.’

‘Do you know these two lads?’ Ambel gestured to the two Vignette crewmen.

Drum eyed the two men while scratching contemplatively at the back of his
neck—a habit he seemed unable to break ever since digging a spider thrall out
of there. ‘I know their faces . . .’ Then his attention wandered to where Anne
and one of his own crewmen were driving a tap into the rum barrel. Suddenly
realizing what he was doing with his hand, he snatched it away to rest on a
nearby rail.

‘These are all that’s left of the Vignette crew.’ Ambel kept a close eye on
the other Captain as he explained the next bit. ‘Seems the rest of the crew
was grabbed by a Prador war drone before it sank their ship.’

‘Really?’
belied by
horror of
hatred of

Drum turned back to look at Ambel. His apparently calm demeanour was
a loud crack as his hand splintered the rail. Most Old Captains’
what Prador had done to their human captives, and their resulting
the aliens, was a pale reflection of Drum’s views on them.

‘Seems,’ said Ambel, ‘that Prador you were hunting on the Skinner’s Island
might have survived. The Warden didn’t say so, but no others have come here.’

Drum released the rail, now reduced to half its original thickness. ‘I think

I’ll be needing a drink.’

So they drank, and Ambel related recent events. Whether Drum believed what he
was told about the whelk and the heirodont (a name for a fable if ever there
was one), Ambel couldn’t tell. Drum obviously had other things on his mind,
murder probably being one of them. Later, Silister and Davy-bronte together
approached Ambel.

‘We’d like to stay with the Treader, if we may,’ said Silister.

‘Why’s that, lad?’ asked Ambel.

Davy-bronte answered. ‘He’s not there yet, nowhere near, but he could turn
too, like Orbus. We don’t want to be here for that.’

‘You think so?’ Ambel asked, and they both nodded vigorously. ‘All right,
let’s get ourselves back, then.’

As Ambel and his fellows made their farewells, Drum said, ‘Looks like a
storm’s about due,’ and Ambel knew he was not referring to the weather.

Drum was so very right, in more ways than he knew.

* * * *

The movable deck section hinged up on hydraulic rams, and the crane ran on
high-powered electric step motors, but it took Hooper muscle to heave the
still-squirming remains of the hooder into the cargo net. Hovering ten metres
above the deck beside the central mainmast, Thirteen watched as the crane
hoisted into the sunshine what was left of the creature—writhing like some
great black maggot—and swung out over the sea to drop it. The drone watched a
sudden activity in the water, spotting leeches and the long writhe of a
rhinoworm closing in, and wondered if the life forms of Spatterjay would be
able to digest this tough alien flesh. Then, turning its attention to Taylor
Bloc and the watching Kladites, Thirteen assessed the situation there.

The Hoopers could probably wipe out these Kladites very quickly, and many of
them were eager to do so. However, Ron kept them on a tight rein, reminding
them that they had yet to be paid, which seemed to do the trick. The Captain
was biding his time, and had quietly opined to Thirteen that something stank

about recent events. The particular group of reifications the hooder had
attacked had been those who had been giving Bloc a hard time—also some of them
had been incinerated by laser carbine. Bloc’s explanation that this had
happened accidentally while the Kladites fired on the hooder was weak at best.
The present situation seemed precarious to the drone, who felt sure it would
not last. Thirteen moved out from the mast and headed for the open deck as
Bloc and his followers returned to their bridge staterooms. From down below
came the sounds of industry.

With the hooder now out of the way, the Hoopers could all continue with the
task of repairing the rudder. The drone descended a couple of levels, then
hovered to observe the maintenance section. Several reifications were shifting
movable floor panels from where they had been stacked to one side, and
slotting them back in place. Two Hoopers had disassembled a large ram, earlier
disconnected from the rudder and carried up here by Captain Ron. Hydraulic
fluid ran out of the ram’s incinerated seals, trickling off the bench on which
it rested. Another Hooper was returning from the stores carrying a box of new
seals, and yet more Hoopers were coming up from the bilge with various other
components of the rudder control system which were in need of repair or
replacement.

Thirteen now dropped down further, into the bilge, and headed back towards the
rudder. On the way the drone halted where a reif and a Hooper were busy
scooping up the rest of the hooder’s remains.

‘Why would Janer Cord Anders be carrying such a weapon?’ the drone sent his
inquiry to a far-away listener.

‘I would guess that the hive mind he consorts with supplied it to him,’ the
Warden replied. ‘This is a situation that bears close watching, and it seems
evident that the Golem, Isis Wade, may be the hive-mind agent I am seeking.’

‘And if that proves to be the case,’ said Thirteen, ‘what action should be
taken?’

‘None at the moment. Our actions are dependent on what the Golem actually
does. If he ever attempts to take any sprine off-planet, he must be stopped,
which I suspect were Janer’s instructions, too. It is, however, doubtful that
this is truly Wade’s aim.’

‘And what might be his aim, then?’

After a long pause the Warden replied, ‘I have no idea.’

Thirteen moved on, finally entering the meeting hall at the stern. Here again
floor panels had been pulled up, but to expose the tangled and incinerated
wreckage around the rudder’s rear tang. The Golem, Isis Wade, was unbolting
the electrical control of a hydraulic pump, while Janer detached various
servo-switches and their charred loom of optics. Others were replacing melted
pipes and heat-seized valves. The work was nearly done, but the rudder
remained jammed over at the full extent of one ram, the ram on the other side
having been removed.

This was where Captain Ron came in. While Thirteen watched, the Old Captain
heaved against the rear tang of the rudder, as if against the bar of a lock
gate. Slowly the rudder began to move round, fluid jetting from melted pipes
and valve holes as the remaining ram closed up. Dragging behind two large iron
wedges, and with a sledgehammer resting over his shoulder, Forlam followed the
Captain.

‘Now,’ said Ron, once the rudder lay straight relative to the ship.

Forlam dragged the wedges into position underneath the tang and hammered them
into place while the Captain continued to prevent the rudder from swinging
back.

‘That’ll do it,’ Ron opined.

Thirteen just filed this further example of how physically strong Old Captains
were. It observed the dents made in the bubble-metal floor by the Captain’s
feet, then swung away to scan, by ultrasound imaging, Janer Cord Anders.
Within a second the drone ascertained that the man still carried his
singularity gun—the drone receiving strange feedback from its vicinity.
Abruptly Isis Wade looked up and located Thirteen.

By radio, Thirteen sent, ‘Are you a hive-mind agent?’

‘Yes,’ replied Wade, without opening his mouth.

‘Why are you here?’

‘To repair this rudder control system.’

‘No, I mean why are you here.’

‘I was never much good at metaphysics.’

Wade returned his attention to his work, no longer responding to Thirteen’s
questions. The drone swung away, floated out into the bilge, and once again
ascended up to the deck. It observed Erlin contemplatively studying formulae
on a screen while, nearby, five reifs floated in tanks of sea water and tried
to live. It saw a Hooper inspecting the hull where it had impacted against an
atoll, only to find no discernible damage. Other Hoopers tossed sacks of human
bones and wrecked reification hardware over the side, and one of the living
sails departed its mast to snatch up a rhinoworm this commotion attracted. The
drone transmitted a signal to Zephyr, and as ever received no response.

Then, once the rudder was repaired, over the ensuing days and nights Thirteen
watched the continuing voyage of the Sable Keech settle into an uneasy rhythm.

* * * *

The trench was a vast canyon under the sea, up to seven kilometres deep in
some places, and sometimes twice as wide. As Sniper cruised down the long
slope leading into it, he observed a wide trail in the sand and mud, then
eventually encountered its source, perambulating along the bottom like a
mobile mountain. From below the slope of gnarled pyramidal shell cut through
with glimmers of iridescence, dinner-plate eyes turned to track his course,
and thick white and grey tentacles groped out of the murk after him. He
accelerated beyond their grasp.

‘Eleven, Twelve, how are you doing?’

Twelve replied, ‘We’ll be with you in two hours.’

‘That the best you can do?’

‘Without imploding, yes,’ Twelve replied dryly.

Sniper grumped to himself and moved on.

Soon he was travelling alongside a vast cliff occupiedby diamond jellyfish
like glinting blue glass eyes, roving glisters black as midnight, and
populations of smaller molluscs roaming like flocks of vertical sheep. All his
detectors were operating at maximum efficiency: his magnetometer checking for
anything metallic around him for a distance of a kilometre, he probed the
ground below with ultrasound and to a wider radius with infrasound, constantly
sampled the sea water for unusual compounds, and just watched, listened ... As
the canyon grew wider, he moved to its centre to maximize the efficiency of
his scans. Detecting metal he immediately put his weapons systems online,
until discovering a vein of silver in the rock. Another return had him digging
down into mud, using his tentacles and the blast of his tractor drive. But he
only revealed a very old piece of ceramal hull, quite possibly from the same
craft Jay Hoop crashed onto what later became the Skinner’s Island. Then
Sniper reached the first side canyon.

He was undecided about entering this tributary, as it seemed too narrow here,
but checking his map of the trench he saw that further along it became wide
enough to hold Ebulan’s ship—or rather Vrell’s ship, now. He motored between
the narrow walls, paused to listen to the sound of packetworms grinding
through obdurate stone, ascertained that the rumbling disguised nothing else,
and moved on. Passing through a blizzard of diamond jellyfish that had
detached from the walls, he found glistening tubular structures sticking to
his armour, so combed them away from his surface with his tentacles and jetted
on beyond the clouds of microscopic eggs thus released. Another of the giant
whelks was wedged in a crevice ahead of him, its cracked shell gaping open,
one eye missing, the remaining eye directed above him to a circling heirodont
the size of an ocean liner. The heirodont ignored Sniper, intent on larger
prey. Beyond them, where the canyon widened, no spaceship was revealed, though
huge pieces of iridescent shell were scattered on the ocean floor. Turning to
head back, Sniper realized his was a walk-on role in a drama played out down
here many times before.

Moving beyond the tributary, Sniper zigged and zagged as the canyon grew
wider, picking up two metallic sources that came to nothing. Another three
tributaries branched off just ahead. Two of them, by his internal map, were
over fifty kilometres long. Assessing how far he had come and what area he had
covered in what time, Sniper made a rough calculation of how long this search
would take him, presupposing he would have to search the entire trench on his
own. The resulting figure depressed him. However, he was no longer alone. Up
above him now he detected two metallic objects descending, and scanning them
by sonar he recognized the shapes of a fish and a scallop.

‘Each of you take one of the longer side canyons,’ he instructed, ‘and
maintain constant link to me.’

‘So you’ll know when we’re obliterated?’ enquired Eleven.

‘I see,’ said Sniper. ‘I thought your descent overly protracted.’

Neither of the other drones replied as they descended to the separate canyons
and sped off into their individual darkness. Sniper turned into the remaining
canyon, there exploring a killing ground used by a large prill—the creature
surrounded on all sides by the dismembered remains of a pod of black glisters.
It leapt up from the bottom at him, turning at the last moment to present its
array of sickle legs revolving like the blades of a food processor. He caught
hold of it with his two larger tentacles, held it for a minute as its bladed
limbs grated harmlessly over his armour, then shoved it away.

‘I haven’t the time,’ he muttered.

‘What was that?’ asked Twelve distantly.

‘Lively down here,’ Sniper sent.

‘Yeah, we’ve seen,’ replied the other drone.

Sniper returned to the main trench, ruminated for a little while as he
searched it, then came to a decision. Abruptly he programmed some missiles in
his carousel, and fired them off along the trench. After a few minutes a
detonation broke the night a few kilometres ahead of him, and his sound
sensors nearly overloaded internal programs with data.

‘What are you doing?’ Twelve asked.

‘Call it extended sonar,’ Sniper replied.

Seeing with sound, he had just shone a very bright torch into the darkness.

‘Better,’ he opined, but he still knew this search could take him weeks.

* * * *

Close to utter exhaustion, the giant whelk pulled herself ashore, discovering
that her buoyancy detracted from her ability to grip the bottom. But still she
refused to release her prize even though it soon became utterly covered with

leeches from the shallows. Reaching the tide line, she stretched tentacles up
the beach and grasped a rocky outcrop to help pull herself and the heirodont’s
severed head finally out of the sea.

The massive head was now just one great writhing mass of leeches. Irritably
she stripped them away, feeding one after another, like sweets, into her beak
and champing them down. A strange whistling sound distracted her, and she kept
searching around for its source, finally locating it as the gas issuing from
the now open orifices in her shell. But she returned her attention to the
leeches, soon revealing the head itself, badly pocked but still recognizable.
She prodded the beast’s mandibles and they snapped at her. Its remaining angry
eye blinked and glared. Groping along the beach till she found a small
boulder, she heaved it up, then smashed it down on each mandible in turn, but
this was still not enough. The whelk hauled herself and the head further up
the beach and, using the rock outcrop as an anvil, again smashed the mandibles
until there was nothing left of them. Next she turned over the head to inspect
the severed neck, then began to chew on the tough flesh. It took her hours to
eat away all the skull’s exterior flesh, but she left the monster eye still
blinking and glaring at her.

Only after another few hours did she discover that no amount of chewing would
get her through the thick skull itself. She glanced towards the sea and
observed huge movement out there. The heirodont’s body still seemed fairly
lively, and somehow had stayed with her despite its lack of a head. Memory
again nudged her. She then finally pecked out the eye and shoved the skull
further inland. It seemed the safest thing to do in the circumstances. Now
replete, she moved on across the island to the beach on its other side. She
settled down contemplatively, gurgling eructations regassing her shell.

Now what? she wondered.

* * * *

Depression slowed Vrell’s return to his sanctum. Some of the U-space engine’s
super-conducting power cables must have had their insulation damaged, for they
had transmitted a massive temperature surge inside it, cracking and blowing
minor components all the way through. The main components remained undamaged,
as they were built to withstand forces far beyond mere heat. The casing of the
line-singularity generator was intact, as were all its internal parts. The
Calabi-Yau shape expansion matrices (a technology stolen from the humans)
could not be damaged by heat, though they could have been collapsed into one
of the smaller dimensions of the quantum foam. And the phase emitters had gone
into safety mode, folding a few degrees out of phase with reality, though
those systems that could bring them back were trashed. Overall, the damage was
beyond anything one Prador adult, even with slaves, could repair. In normal
circumstances the functional parts would have been salvaged and all the rest
scrapped. Yet, as Vrell entered his sanctum, he began to think the
unthinkable.

Bringing back the phase emitters would be the most taxing task, but then the
repairs to their support systems could be countenanced. Perhaps if he used an
expanded Calabi-Yau shape as a tool . . . Such shapes were, after all,
six-dimensional. All he needed to do was work out the formulae controlling
energy input into a matrix, so as to distort the shape into the spatial
analogue holding the phase emitters. At a rate of one base-format calculation
per second, using all the ship’s computing, this would take Vrell
approximately four thousand years. Too slow, therefore. But aboard there was
further computing capacity he could use, in the form of human minds. He turned
his attention to his control units and the spider thralls they controlled. It
should be possible to use those minds to increase the computing power by an
order of magnitude ... It was then that Vrell noticed some interference to the
thrall channels, and immediately put a trace and decode program onto it.

More Prador? Here?

The program did its work with surprising speed, and Vrell studied the results.
In the ocean, not very far from him in planetary terms, he had detected the
code spillover from nine interlinked spider thralls. That was very strange.
The readings he was getting told him they linked through only one channel back
to a control unit up on the sea’s surface. This did not seem like the work of
Prador, for there was no encryption in the coding, yet their technology was
definitely being employed.

Nine thralls . . .

This meant a mind, or minds, he could use. He must take the risk.

‘Brother, retrieve this.’ He sent coordinates and the signal to trace to the
drone cache. ‘If you are seen, do not return here until you have destroyed the
watcher.’

‘Yes, brother mine,’ the earlier version of Vrell replied, as it motored its
war drone body out into the depths.

* * * *

It had been another slow day aboard the Sable Keech, but it would not be long
before things started to get more interesting. Forlam, who of course was
fascinated by the ship’s grisly passengers, had informed Erlin of the recent
events below decks, and of the discovery of some reifs incinerated by laser
carbine. So it seemed Bloc might be beginning to exercise his power. Did she
feel good about the possibility of danger? She was not sure. However, whatever

he might do did not negate what she felt were her responsibilities here. She
looked across the lower Tank Room to where Janer was working. She had spent
most of the day running diagnostic checks of the control equipment and, at her
behest, he was visually checking filters and scanning for contamination in the
small autodocs each tank employed. She would let him go once he seemed about
ready to start shouting at her, which would bring them full circle to the end
of their last relationship. But the equipment needed to be ready. And here,
she thought, turning to the reif who had just stepped from the stairwell, is
the reason why.

‘Just lie down on the table,’ she said, when he finally approached.

The reif, a man without visible signs of a death wound, twisted his face in
what looked very like a grin. ‘I’m not here for a medical.’

Erlin felt there was something not quite right about him—but then that could
just be her. She had been sane for only a little while now, and even so knew
that the virus had wrought changes in her mind. Some day she must make a study
of the psychological damage the change caused.

‘Then why are you here, John Styx?’ asked Janer, who had rapidly found this an
excuse not to continue with his mind-numbing task.

‘Janer,’ said the reif, then looked at each of them in turn before tilting his
head to stare up at the ceiling, focusing on one of the camphones attached
there. Erlin did not need any further hint. She beckoned him to follow her
into an area separated by partitions erected by one of the Hoopers. Here, on
wide work surfaces, sophisticated equipment lay at her disposal. It was also
her base and her refuge.

‘Unfortunately, when crewman Lumor put up these partitions, he accidentally
smashed the camphones. Very clumsy. He’s also sadly been unable to locate
replacements for them.’

The reif grinned. It was definitely a grin this time. Erlin shot a look at
Janer, taking in his slightly bemused expression, before returning her
attention to the reif. He reached into his pocket and withdrew a dented spray
can. She took it and held it up.

‘And what am I supposed to do with this?’

‘I would like you to analyse the contents.’

‘It may have escaped your notice, but I am rather busy.’

‘This will only take a moment of your time, Erlin.’

Something familiar . . .

Erlin shook the can and turned with it to her nanoscope, which included a
viewing screen mounted above the glittering mechanisms of the scope itself.
Using the side console she designated an empty sample cylinder from the
carousel of six. The carousel turned, and in a moment the small chainglass
cylinder folded out from the scope’s mouth.

‘Could this be dangerous?’ she asked.

‘Not now,’ Styx replied.

She grunted and just held the spray can over the top open end of the cylinder,
and sprayed inside. ‘Right,’ she said, working the console, ‘could this be
nanotech?’

‘I think not,’ said Styx. ‘I rather suspect some animal product.’

The cylinder folded back into the scope. ‘In that case I’ll just use
straightforward molecular analysis.’ The screen blinked on displaying a
shifting cladogram. Chemical formulae began to scroll up below it. ‘You’re
right; looks like some kind of hormone.’

‘Would you be able to find out what kind?’

Erlin began running a program to compare the substance in the scope with the
billions listed in the scope’s database, then she turned and gazed at him.
‘Who are you and what do you want?’

‘I want some answers,’ the reif replied.

‘You didn’t answer both of Erlin’s questions,’ said Janer.

‘For all present purposes, I am the reification John Styx. However . . .’

Styx rolled up his sleeve to expose an antique watch. He did something with
the controls and pressed his thumb against the face. After what ensued, both
Erlin and Janer laughed out loud—which was obviously not the reaction Styx had
been expecting.

* * * *

14

Sea Lily:
these plants are a close relation to the seacane, but the fact that they
sprout flowers has provided the source of much contention between
xenobotanists. Flowers mean pollinators and there is only one pollinator on
the planet—the lung bird—which usually stays inland and needs to be attracted
out by a very strong (and fetid) perfume. So how did this variety of seacane
evolve flowers? The issue is further complicated: seacane was, far in the
past, a land plant but, like the ocean heirodonts, it moved back into the sea.
The lung bird is a crustacean that came out of the sea and took to wing. So in
evolutionary terms the two life forms were travelling in opposite directions.
Many theories have been posited to account for this, including alien
interference. Probably the truth has much to do with six billion years of
uninterrupted evolution. The same truth accounts for the lily’s symbiotic
relationship with rhinoworms, and the relationship between leeches and
peartrunk trees—

The spaceship surfaced from U-space like a volcanic island heaving up out of
the ocean: something hot and titanic, vaporizing anything that touched it.
Immediately alerted, the Warden observed it through some of his deep-space
eyes, and in that interval the rent through from U-space had yet to close. The
thing was three kilometres long, nearly as wide, and a kilometre deep.
Inevitably its shape was similar to a Prador’s carapace, but one distorted by
encrustations that the Warden was uncomfortably aware were powerful weapons
systems.

That was quick, was the AI’s immediate thought.

This Prador ship must only have been days away from the system.

Immediately upon that thought, the Warden’s suspicions were aroused: Why so
close?

‘Prador vessel, this is the Warden of Spatterjay opening communication,’ the
AI sent.

The huge ship continued into the system on a dirty fusion drive that caused a
lot of interference with the Warden’s link to its scattered eyes. The AI knew
that Prador fusion drives were as efficient as Polity ones, producing less
than 15-12% total fuel burn as isotope pollution. The interference was
deliberate, which probably meant this spaceship contained technology the
Prador did not want the Polity to know about. Such an action could be simply a
sensible precaution of creatures keeping their offensive and defensive
capabilities secret, but there could also be a more sinister purpose behind
that.

‘Prador vessel, this is the Warden of Spatterjay. Please respond.’

Nothing. The Warden became uncomfortably aware of how Coram lay, at present,
directly in the vessel’s path. The AI now considered initiating the moon
base’s defence systems, but that might be taken as undue provocation. Instead
it sent signals to move its eyes in closer—a different kind of provocation.
Side thrusters now fired, turning the behemoth round. The rear drives dropped
to a spluttering low-power burn, then went up to full power when the vessel
lay rear-end towards Coram and the planet. This burn lasted only a few minutes
before shutting off. It was perfectly timed so that the ship now drifted in
surrounded by a screen of radioactive gas. Then a powerful signal came through
and the Warden was looking into a Prador captain’s sanctum.

‘Communication acknowledged,’ came the reply in human tongue, but there was no
sign of any Prador in that sanctum.

‘How do you wish to proceed in retrieving your citizen?’ the Warden
immediately sent.

Now a shape finally moved into view, and the AI wondered about the paranoia
evident aboard the Prador ship, for the respondent wore heavy exotic metal
armour. Then he realized that this individual must be one of the King’s Guard,
for they all wore armour like this.

‘Transmit details,’ said the Prador.

By transmitting most of those details verbally, the Warden gave itself long
seconds to think. ‘I was informed of the disappearance of a sailing vessel on
Spatterjay and sent my drones to investigate. Traces of Prador exotic metal
were found in the sunken wreck of that ship—map location inserted—and the crew
is missing. I sent my drones then to the location of Ebulan’s spaceship—map
location. It has been moved, most likely to the Lamarck Trench. It seems
likely that the Prador Vrell, who was Ebulan’s first-child, now has control of
Ebulan’s ship.’

‘Why is this first-child alive? I was informed at the time that Ebulan and all
his kin were terminated.’

Interesting. The Warden could not help but speculate how long this ship had
been waiting outside the Spatterjay system. Ten years perhaps? Had Ebulan
succeeded here, would he have been allowed to return to the Prador Third
Kingdom?

‘How should I address you?’ the Warden asked.

‘I am . . . Vrost.’

‘Vrost, please send me all you know concerning the events here,’ said the
Warden.

After a long delay an information package came through. The Warden opened it
in programming space designated for potential viral/worm attacks. There was no
danger in it, however, and the AI soon ascertained that though the Prador knew
most of the story, there were certain critical gaps in that knowledge.

‘As you know,’ said the Warden, ‘Vrell was sent to the island on a suicide
mission to kill those Old Captains who could bear witness to Ebulan’s
involvement in Jay Hoop’s human-coring trade. But, transforming into an adult
there, Vrell was able to disobey his father’s orders. After Ebulan’s ship went
down, he made the attempt to return to it. No further action was taken against
him because, first, it was unlikely he could survive the underwater journey to
the ship and, second, it seemed an impossibility that he could survive the
remaining booby traps his father would have installed in it.’

‘How did you bring down Ebulan’s ship?’ the Prador asked.

‘How long have you been waiting outside this system?’ the Warden countered.

There came no reply, nor for another six hours. After that time the Prador
ship again activated side thrusters, this time to divert its course behind
Coram and down towards Spatterjay. The Warden’s patience then ran out.

‘Vrost, since you have seen fit to cease communicating, I can do no less in
response than activate my lowest level defensive/offensive capability.’

The Warden activated the moon base’s defensive system, and observed weapons
turrets breaking up through Coram’s icy sulphurous crust all around. They rose
like giant tube-worms into vacuum, folding armoured plates away from the
business ends of near-C rail-guns, antiphoton cannons and particle-beam
projectors. Racks of smart missiles folded up into view like collections of
pan pipes. This was not the AI’s ‘lowest level defensive/offensive
capability’, but all it possessed. It was also something the citizens in the
base could not avoid witnessing through the chainglass panoramic windows.
Queries started coming in through personal comps and augs. The Warden put up a
bulletin:

BUFFER TECHNICAL FAULT DUE TO MICRO-METEORITE PUNCTURES. FURTHER METEORITE
ACTIVITY IMMINENT. RUNCIBLE IS NOW OPEN PORT TO ALL SYSTEMS.

Of course, the Warden had been here before.

FOR YOUR CONVENIENCE AND SAFETY, ALL CITIZENS PLEASE PROCEED TO THE RUNCIBLE
GATE.

The runcible was soon throwing people away from the moon just as fast as
possible, to be caught by whichever runcibles were available to catch them.
Some of those travellers might find themselves hundreds of light years away.
There was no real panic, but then many Polity citizens had never faced a
physical threat at any time in their lives. For most of them this seemed an
enjoyable bit of excitement. Fielding a growing number of queries, the Warden
noticed a small percentage of people who were clearly dubious about the board
messages.

‘You lying fuck, Warden,’ said a three-hundred-year-old woman as she hurried
towards the runcible. Checking her ident package and cross-referencing it to

traveller lists stored from ten years ago, the AI ascertained that, like the
rest of the doubters, she had been here the last time this happened, too.

‘Lock down and full defences,’ the Warden told the submind running the
planetary base.

‘Ah, it’s getting nasty, then.’

‘Not yet, but it would be best to be prudent.’

Just then the Prador captain communicated.

‘None of your present weapons are capable of bringing down a Prador light
destroyer, such as Ebulan’s, let alone my ship,’ it observed.

‘I am glad you have decided to continue our communication. I would not want to
proceed to defence level seven, nor six.’

‘I have scanned the moon on which you are situated. You possess no further
armament.’

‘Ever heard of chameleonware?’

An encoded message came through from a different source. ‘Ooh, what porky pies
you’ve been telling.’

‘Shut up, Seven,’ said the Warden, observing that the turbot drone was now
moonlighting by carrying passengers’ luggage to the runcible.

This time the reply from the Prador captain took an hour to arrive, while its
ship went into orbit around Spatterjay. The radioactive cloud surrounding the
vessel was dispersing now, but still isotopes coating its exotic metal surface
concealed much. Some areas were also very well shielded. However, the Warden
now had a clear and detailed exterior view, and could see huge blockish shapes
shifting position on the warship’s hull. This time the communication began
with a map, sans ocean, of Spatterjay’s surface, the Lamarck Trench being
indicated by Prador positional glyphs.

The warship captain asked, ‘Is this sub-oceanic feature the Lamarck Trench?’

The Warden considered denial, but only momentarily.

‘It is.’

Shapes began launching from the warship and spreading out through space. Some
of them were war drones, others were Prador in that heavy armour, hundreds of
them. Then out of the ship’s hull folded one of those titanic blockish
structures, and the Warden picked up energy signatures it knew indicated the
charging of a massive coil-gun.

‘Your actions would indicate,’ suggested the Warden, ‘that Vrell is not to be
welcomed back into the Prador Third Kingdom?’

* * * *

Detecting a slight rise in background residual radiation, Sniper suppressed a
surge of excitement. There were deposits of pitchblende on the bottom of the
ocean, and the briefly radioactive current could have picked up some of that
anywhere. Scanning into ultraviolet, he watched a scarf of blue water
dissipating behind him. There were similar blue areas in a chaotic
boulder-field where part of the cliff had collapsed. He rose higher to get a
wider view over the field, then descended at an angle towards the largest area
of blue. It seemed to be seeping from some kind of cavern. Sniper hesitated at
the entrance. Certainly no Prador vessel was concealed in there, but perhaps
here was some clue.

As he made the decision to enter, a black glister surged out with its claws
spread threateningly. Upon observing him, it began frantically sculling itself
to one side. It held something in its mandibles—something that glowed into the
ultraviolet. Sniper stabbed out a tentacle and slapped hard behind the
creature’s head, and in a cloud of blue the glister released its prize, but
clamped a claw on the offending tentacle. Sniper flicked the glister,
tumbling, away and turned his attention to picking up what it had dropped. At
first it was only identifiable as a lump of flesh and gristle clinging to a
bone, but Sniper needed no new programs to quickly recognize the bone as a
human tibia. He dropped the remnant just as the glister attacked again, this
time closing both its claws together on one of his tentacles. He reached out
with two more and tore the creature in half, before finally entering the cave.

Ultraviolet revealed killing levels of radiation as a luminescent blue fog

that obscured all view in that part of the spectrum. Infrared revealed seven
glisters fighting over something. Two of them turned towards him, and he hit
them both with his dissuader. Broiled bright red, they sank to the bottom.
Only then taking some notice of the Warden’s instructions concerning the local
fauna, he slid around behind the feeding creatures and tried to drive them out
of the cave. They would not be driven, he being of a size that perhaps this
pod of glisters thought they could handle. He tried ultrasound, infrasound,
just simply pushing them with his tentacles, then, his patience at an end, he
hit them all in turn with high-power ultrasound pulses. When, internally
shattered, they all sank to the bottom, he closed in and pulled their
twitching hard-shelled bodies away from the prey.

There was little left: just disjointed bones, torn flesh and skin, and some
rags of clothing. The skull of this crewman, who must have come from the
Vignette, had been crushed, and the brains sucked out. A spider thrall lay
nearby. Sniper scanned it, but it was offline, emitting no carrier signal, so
there was nothing for him to track. He backed out of the cave and sent a
description of his finds to Eleven and Twelve.

‘So we’re close, then,’ replied Twelve.

‘Certainly hot,’ Eleven quipped.

‘Possibly,’ said Sniper. ‘We don’t know how far this corpse was carried by the
current or by those fighting for a mouthful of it, and it might also have been
dumped from Vrell’s ship while it was in transit. Make sure you scan for
radioactivity.’

‘I have been,’ said Twelve. ‘I’m coming up out of the end of my particular
tributary, and I’ve detected something about a kilometre out from me.’

‘Send it,’ said Sniper, then viewed the distant blob, blued by ultraviolet and
rendered unrecognizable by distance. Now Twelve was sending a narrow-beam
sonar image, slowly building. Sniper guessed what he was seeing, just by the
size and general spherical shape. His guess was confirmed when things began
detaching from the distant object and heading towards Twelve.

‘Fuck, not again,’ said the drone. ‘Warden!’

The view tilted, levelled again. The distant object must have moved very
quickly because now it was gone from view, though the underwater missiles it
had sent were closing fast. Sniper then received a close-up image of a
nose-cone, just before the transmissions from Twelve blinked out.

‘Warden, Prador war drone detected,’ sent Sniper, winding up his tractor drive
as he turned towards the surface, then engaging his S-cav field and taking off
like a rocket.

‘I can’t say I’m surprised,’ the Warden sent. ‘Twelve just joined me. Now, you
and Eleven get out of that trench right now, and get as far from it as you
can, as quickly as you can.’

‘What—’ Sniper began, but upon receipt of another image, this time from one of
the Warden’s spatial eyes, he fell silent for a moment before saying, ‘We’ll
lose track of that drone.’

* * * *

The coil-gun fired, the projectile only becoming visible on reaching
atmosphere—an orange line stabbing down towards Spatterjay’s ocean. Spectral
analysis of the trail told the Warden that it was left by a large slug of
exotic metal. The Prador captain had not actually resorted to planet busters,
but this was bad enough. The missile hit with no visible effect for a fraction
of a second, then the ocean rose and opened around a white-hot cylinder, a
disc of cloud rapidly growing above it. The cylinder collapsed as it spread
out into a tsunami travelling at over a thousand kilometres per hour. The
ocean-level winds would move just as fast, and blast-furnace hot. Luckily the
only sentient life forms in the vicinity were Sniper and Eleven, and some tomb
robbers the Warden had been keeping an eye on over the other side of the
Skinner’s Island. Most of the explosion’s energy would be spent by the time it
reached civilization, though some ocean-going vessels were about to be in for
a rough ride. However, the worst damage would be precisely where intended, in
the oceanic trench many kilometres below the surface.

‘Prador vessel, cease firing on the planet forthwith!’ the Warden sent.

The coil-gun was charging again. The Prador clearly intended to work along the
entire length of the trench to drive Vrell out from hiding. If it did that,
the effects would certainly be felt all the way around the planet. Tens of
thousands would die, environmental damage would be vast, but that would only
be the beginning. The resultant volcanic activity in the trench would drive
whole trench-dwelling species into extinction and cause climatic changes
around the planet. The Warden could not allow this, and preventing such a
catastrophe was totally within its remit.

Immediately, the Warden completely shut down the runcible, even though there
were still many travellers ready to leave. The AI briefly observed someone
stepping into the Skaidon meniscus extending between the device’s bull horns,

then stepping out the other side and looking utterly bewildered to find
himself still on Coram as the meniscus dissolved. The Coram runcible buffers
were galactic upside, which meant that for travel more energy came into the
runcible here than went out. The Warden had to periodically arrange pure
energy transmissions to a runcible out on one of the many cold worlds that
were still being terraformed, where it could be usefully employed. But it had
not done that in some time, and now found a use for the surplus.

‘Cease firing on the planet, or I will be forced to take action,’ the Warden
sent.

‘And what action might that be?’ the Prador captain sent back.

The AI’s bluff was being called. It realized that in this situation neither
rail-guns nor other missile launchers would act fast enough, as the coil-gun
was launching near-C kinetic missiles. Only light itself would do. The Warden
selected one heavy laser that stood furthest away from the moon base. The
weapon, even though it was the biggest, was woefully underpowered for the
demand about to be made on it, but would have to do.

The super-conducting ground cables would be able to take the load, and the
device itself would smoothly turn that energy into a beam until it vaporized
about two seconds later. The advantage here was that it would continue to lase
even as it fell apart, even up to the point of the cylinders—containing the
lasing gas—melting. The Warden chose a target area and prepared one buffer to
dump its energy load in a cable he was now isolating to the laser. It was
ready, but how would the Prador react? It would think the AI had used the only
suitable weapon available to it, overloading and destroying that weapon in the
process. The art, the Warden well knew, came in what was said rather than
done.

‘I have no wish to cause an incident,’ said the Warden, ‘nor have I any wish
for you to cause the same.’

‘This is not a Polity world,’ the Prador replied, ‘and your ground base is in
no danger.’

‘Spatterjay is a protectorate—’

The coil-gun fired again and, an instant after, so did the laser. The paths of
the beam and the slug of exotic metal intercepted in the upper atmosphere. A
spectacular explosion ensued, violet-shifted fire licking down into the
stratosphere while a disc of rainbow incandescence spread in the ionosphere.
The Warden observed the laser turret vaporizing down the S-con cable, and a

plume of glowing gas extending out from the moon. Now the Warden fed the
remaining energy contained in the buffers into the runcible, transmitting it
to one of those distant cold worlds. It knew the Prador captain would read
that a large amount of energy was being transferred somewhere, but no more
than that.

‘You destroyed one of your weapons,’ the Prador said.

‘Obviously I was bluffing,’ said the Warden. ‘I possess only one level of
conventional weaponry here, as you have seen. Please do not force me to resort
to U-space or gravtech devices, or anything runcible-based. The result would
be . . . regrettable.’

Of course the newer Polity battleships did carry such weapons: USERs and
DUSERs being respectively general underspace interference emitters, and the
directed kind which could cause a U-space drive to detonate; the various
DIGRAWs—directed gravity weapons—which if they did not instantly shred their
target, would occlude any antimatter vessels that same target contained with
the same result, besides other devices bearing numerous other acronyms. AIs
were reluctant to employ them in battle, as the difference between what the
Warden labelled conventional weapons and those devices was the difference
between a machine gun and an ICBM. However, the Prador must have some
knowledge of them, since bad news like that is not easily concealed.

After a long delay the Prador captain asked, ‘What do you suggest?’

* * * *

Still accelerating away, Sniper saw first the underwater flash, then what
looked like a fast-moving and immense aquarium glass hurrying to catch him up.
He withdrew his tentacles and head, and closed and sealed his composite
clypeus. The pressure wave hit him, travelling at Mach 3. His cavitating field
went out, and the drive sputtered to a stop shortly after. Those senses of his
relying on sound were soon providing no useful information at all, and his
other senses could probe no distance into the grey chaos. But in a U-space
transmission he picked up Eleven’s brief ‘Oh shit’ as that submind—at the
moment of its fish-shell destruction—transmitted itself to the Warden. Sniper
was unsurprised: Eleven’s shell had not been as rugged as his own, and he
himself was getting a battering.

Sniper’s structure distorted and components broken inside him. He noted
high-pressure water forcing its way inside him through a breach in the tractor
drive and tried closing its ports, but it was like trying to shut them on
stone. Then the pressure wave passed on. He flipped down his clypeus, extruded
his head and tentacles, and saw he was tumbling through hot clear water above
a stratum of silty chaos. Activating his tractor drive and stabilizing himself

with his tentacles, he watched the silt boil to a halt in its direction of
flow, and all sorts of strange objects begin to float up out of it. There the
carapace of a large prill, devoid of legs and bubbling hot internal gases, and
there the separate carapace segments of glisters, red as cooked lobsters, and
the strandy glutinous masses that were all that remained of leeches. Then
something dropped past him from above and it took him a moment to identify the
completely intact skeleton of a heirodont, boiled clean of flesh.

‘Well, if it’s fucking war they want,’ he sent.

‘It is not war,’ the Warden replied. ‘But it seems they very much don’t want
Vrell leaving here alive.’

‘Seems a bit drastic just for one post-adolescent Prador,’ Sniper opined.

‘Yes, it does—and that’s interesting.’

Sniper began motoring towards the surface. ‘Did they hit him?’

‘Not as far as I can gather.’

Sniper broke through the surface into a hurricane raging below the weirdest
sky he had seen in a long time. A low ceiling of grey cloud stretched from
horizon to horizon, but wherever it broke he observed the rainbow aurora of
high-atmosphere ionization.

The Warden continued, ‘That was in the nature of a little nudge to drive him
from cover. At present no further such nudges will be forthcoming, so I
suggest you find Ebulan’s ship before our friend up here gets impatient
again.’

Sniper located himself on his internal map by signals from one of the Warden’s
satellites, and realized the pressure wave had carried him eighty kilometres.

‘Okay, send me a copy of Twelve’s last ten minutes. That drone he detected was
probably heading straight back to Vrell.’

The package arrived within a second, but it took a minute for Sniper to delete

everything irrelevant: including the drone’s boredom with the task in hand, a
program it was running concerning the historical significance of seashells,
and how it really didn’t want to get splattered when so close to buying
emancipation. The residue fined down to Twelve’s exact position when it had
detected the Prador drone, that drone’s then position, and its general course
before it spotted Twelve. Sniper aligned that same course on his internal map,
and saw that continuing it in a straight line brought it to a point on the
Lamarck Trench five hundred kilometres from where he was. He tried to start
his supercavitating field, but it was then that a swarm of error messages
called attention to themselves.

‘Fuckit, fuckit, fuckit!’ Sniper repeated as, on tractor drive only, he headed
slowly to that identified location, while shifting internal micro-welding
heads to repair the breaches in the S-cav field generator.

* * * *

As fast as possible, Vrell put his blanks on hold, clinging to the nearest
supports and holding onto any breakable items. He shut down all internal
systems that could be disrupted by a shock, isolated fusion reactors, and
closed all the workable internal doors. The drone made it back inside just in
time, and Vrell rapidly closed the cache door behind it. Then he himself
clattered over to one side and clung to the uneven wall of the sanctum. The
underwater blast wave slammed into the ship, lifting it up off the bottom so
the concealing layer covering its upper hull slid away, and grinding it down
nose first a few hundred metres along the bottom of the trench. Then the ship
settled in a roiling cloud of silt. Debris falling through the water—boiled
and broken creatures, boulders torn free from above and the silt itself—would
soon conceal him again. But perhaps the time for concealment of that kind had
ended.

Vrell absorbed the download from his drone. It had been spotted by one of the
Warden’s drones, but had destroyed that observer just before the blast. But
the Warden would now know this ship was close, and so might detect it at any
moment. Vrell listened again to the transmissions he had decoded between the
Warden and the Prador warship. If Vrell’s ship was detected down here, how
long before the Prador captain fired a kinetic missile directly on target?
Admittedly the captain had not yet recognized the Warden’s double bluff, for
it was fabricated upon the way this very ship had first been brought down.
Vrell knew this had been effected by subversion of thrall codes, distracting
Ebulan sufficiently for that old war drone to slam both itself and a dead
Prador drone down on top of the ship from high atmosphere, with an impact not
dissimilar to that of the recently fired kinetic missile. No U-space or
gravtech weapons had been deployed—the Warden possessed none. However, Vrell
thought it likely that the Prador captain had actually ceased firing because
he did not want to cause an incident, and the fifty or so kinetic missiles he
might need to work along the entire length of the trench would certainly do
that. Just one missile though ...

Vrell then considered why the captain had fired at all. Obviously the Prador

King knew what the Spatterjay virus could turn other Prador into, and
suspected that Vrell, having survived so long on this planet, might also be
infected. The King certainly did not want that kind of competition, nor for
anyone but himself and his immediate offspring to enjoy the same advantage.

‘What do I do with this?’ asked the drone from down in its cache.

Vrell came sharply out of his reverie, to look through his brother’s eyes, and
through those others’ eyes down below. The drone was holding part of a
segmented life form in its claws. Though one end of it was ragged, as if part
of it had been torn away, it was still writhing furiously. Vrell picked up the
uncoded thrall carrier signals issuing from it and, as he magnetometer-scanned
it, realized there was a spider thrall lodged in each of its segments. It was
then easy for him to read the carrier signal and program it into the control
unit previously employed to run the radioactive blank ejected earlier. This
certainly could be no setup instituted by Prador, for they were utterly aware
of the interchangeability of control unit and thrall. For if you did not
sufficiently encrypt signals to and from a thrall, an enemy might use it to
control you instead. This had happened regularly in the Third Kingdom and,
adult Prador being even less friendly to each other than to different species,
the result was usually extremely painful, messy, and then terminal.

Vrell linked through with ease, quickly decoded the programs employed, and
usurped the partitioned control unit at the other end. He then gazed, through
human eyes, out across the ocean, discovering that Taylor Bloc’s mind was a
morass of contradictory conviction and frustration. The three partitions were
designed for three control channels: one each for two human minds and one for
what remained of the creature his drone had retrieved. But the whole system
had become scrambled by the feedback caused by the creature’s massive injury.
The two human minds were currently offline, somnolent. Perfect, for here then
was more processing space for the U-space formulae. Keeping Taylor Bloc
unaware, Vrell routed through programming links to those two minds he had
controlled, and immediately began using them to run formulae, then he returned
his attention to the reif himself.

Only touching Bloc’s mind lightly, Vrell replayed fragments of his recent
memory. In these he observed the launching of the Sable Keech and the
subsequent embarkation of Polity citizens. Replaying more recent events he was
amused by the thoroughly human drama unfolding. By the signal strength from
the control unit he had just usurped, he realized the huge sailing ship itself
was close.

Interesting, thought Vrell.

* * * *

Standing on the top of the midship deckhouse, Janer raised his image
intensifier to his eyes and studied the distant volcanic island. It was
nameless, that place, so on the map called up on his cabin screen bore only a
number. Commenting on this island to Erlin, who at that moment was hoisting
yet another reif into yet another tank—over twenty of them had gone into the
tanks now—she had replied, ‘Flowers in the sea there—a kind of sea lily you
find out this way—that’s about all I remember, because I was losing it by
then.’

‘Sorry?’

‘I saw it as Zephyr carried me over.’

‘I see.’

Janer moved on then, recognizing impatience in her voice. Zephyr, he thought.
There was some connection between that one and Isis Wade, for Wade had been
spending a lot of time conversing with the Golem sail up in the rigging.
Perhaps it would all come out when Wade made his promised explanation.

Ah, flowers . . .

The island was definitely volcanic—it could not have borne a more classically
volcanic shape. And now, in the shallow seas surrounding it, Janer observed
masses of lily pads bearing blowsy blue flowers. There were also things
swimming amid those masses of vegetation, but it could not discern whether
they were rhinoworms or medium-sized sea leeches.

‘Zephyr has a curious fascination with lilies,’ came a voice from behind, ‘but
then he has a curious fascination with anything related to death.’

‘You walk very soft, Wade,’ said Janer, removing the intensifier from his
eyes.

‘I’m no clunking robot, if that’s what you mean.’ Isis Wade stepped up beside
him.

‘There’s a lot of things you are not. What I’d like to know is precisely what
you are.’

‘Isn’t that something we’d all like to know?’

‘Don’t start waxing philosophical on me. You know what I mean.’

‘Explanations?’ asked Wade.

‘It’s about time, while this calm lasts.’ Janer gestured to a squad of
Kladites marching along the deck below.

‘Yes . . .’ said Wade. ‘Very well, I do represent an ancient hive mind. I in
fact do more than that. Have you ever wondered why there are separate distinct
hive minds rather than just one mind encompassing the entire hornet species?’

‘I can’t say it’s been very high on my mental agenda.’

‘I suppose not, and really I cannot clearly answer that question. Perhaps,
just like individuality in any species, and the reasons for sex, it is a
survival strategy. Perhaps, back before even dinosaurs walked the Earth, there
was just one mind. Who knows? What I do know is that now there are many minds,
and the way more are created is by the division, the breaking apart, of
larger, older minds as the masses of hives that carry them become . . .
unwieldy.’

‘The mind I represented was young,’ Janer observed.

‘It was: just one fragment that survived of a mind that broke apart during an
ice age. Hornets do not cope well with the cold, which is why none of the
other fragments survived.’

‘No, really?’ said Janer.

Wade smiled and continued, ‘On Hive it is warm, and on Earth hives are better
equipped against the cold, but ancient minds still face that threat of
division—death to them individually, or maybe just death to their
individuality. The mind I represent is so dividing and would have had to
accept its lot, had it not been for human technology. But now there is the
possibility of memcording. The mind has managed to hold itself together, in so
much as it has so far only divided into two. One half is rational and prepared

to memcord itself and accept that as life. The other half is . . . unbalanced.
It will not accept death, believes death an entity to be fought. Nor can it
accept memcording as life.’

‘Rather like our friends here, who don’t truly consider reification life,
merely a kind of purgatory.’ Janer shrugged. ‘Well, something like that.’

‘I don’t just represent the mind,’ said Wade.

‘What do you represent?’

‘One half of the argument.’

‘What?’

‘The other half is Zephyr.’

Janer just stood there staring as he realized what he was being told. After a
moment he asked, ‘Which half are you?’

‘The rational half, of course.’

‘So let me get this straight.’ Janer pointed above. ‘We’ve got the nuts half
of an ancient hive mind up there in a Golem sail. It doesn’t accept memcording
as life, yet it is a memcording itself. You are the sane half, if that’s
possible.’

‘Yes, that’s about right.’

‘What do you hope to achieve here?’

‘I hope to persuade Zephyr to accept memcording as life—to accept rationality
over the visceral or emotional. If it accepts that, a template of its
understanding can be transmitted via hivelink back to Hive. This will enable
the two halves of my other self to come together for memcording.’

‘And if you fail?’

‘Then this,’ Wade pressed his hand against his own chest, ‘is the best my
other self might achieve, and it must therefore accept dissolution.’

‘So no sprine thefts, no attempts at planetary domination involved here, just
a bit of literal psychoanalytical projection?’

‘There is a further complication, and it does concern sprine.’

‘Isn’t there always? Tell me about it.’

Wade then explained to him why Zephyr was here, and Janer felt himself grow
cold. He looked off past the Golem, across the ship to the further horizon.

‘That’s bad,’ he said.

‘Yes, it is.’

After a moment Janer realized he could not actually see the horizon, and he
also realized that the Sable Keech was heeling over and turning hard. He again
raised his intensifier to his eyes.

‘And talking of bad.’

The cloud, laced with lightning, looked like a roller of wild bruised flesh.
The wave, hammering towards them below it, was higher than their ship, and
looked more solid still.

* * * *

‘Keep us turning. I want us bows-on towards that mess. Zephyr, start reefing
all sail right now,’ said Captain Ron. ‘Then get yourself and your friends to
cover or in the air—whichever you prefer.’

‘Is that a good idea?’ asked John Styx who, without protest from Ron, had
taken up position at the coms console. ‘It’ll slow our turn.’

The Sable Keech was turning slowly while that wave, and the storm riding it,
was coming bloody fast. Sideways on, the ship would capsize, and it would
probably then stay that way, despite the heavy machinery acting as ballast
down in the bilge.

‘We’ll be able to make the turn under present momentum,’ Ron replied. ‘If we
leave sail on, that might tear out the masts, holing the deck and possibly the
hull. We really don’t want holes in this ship right now.’

Bows on, the Sable Keech might be able to stay on the surface, though Ron
thought it likely the wave still would break its back. That way, however, at
least the passengers and crew might survive the coming experience.

‘Everybody been warned?’ Ron asked generally.

‘I’ve been repeating the warning over the ship’s intercom, and putting it up
on every cabin screen,’ said John Styx. ‘Others are spreading the word, where
they can.’

‘Ah, good.’ Ron eyed the others on the bridge. Then, entertaining a suspicion,
he turned his attention to Forlam. ‘You got that rudder hard over, Forlam?’

‘Certainly have.’ Forlam gazed at the approaching wave with his eyes
glittering.

Ron reached out to grab the helm and tug at it a little, to make sure Forlam
was not making any small but possibly fatal mistake, as was his tendency. He
found the helm was hard over, however. Forlam gave him a hurt look, then
returned his attention to the wave.

‘Nearly there. We’re gonna make it, boys,’ said Ron.

Others on the bridge, looking doubtful, kept clinging to the nearest
handholds. Ron himself reached out and closed his hand around a nearby

stanchion. Something big had hit: this looked like the wave thrown up by a
seaborne atomic explosion, of which Ron had seen his fair share during the
Prador war. It might have been seven or more centuries ago, but you tended not
to forget stuff like that.

‘What do you reckon caused it?’ Ron asked, generally.

‘Dunno, Captain,’ came the general reply from the Hoopers.

It struck the Old Captain that his bridge crew was not overly gifted with
imagination anyway, so he turned to Styx. ‘Any ideas?’

Styx studied the displays. ‘It was an orbital kinetic strike over the Lamarck
Trench in Nort Sea.’

‘Right. And the source?’

‘Prador battleship. A big one.’

‘Well, that’s a bugger,’ said Ron, just as the massive wave hit.

The Sable Keech did not lie completely bows-on to the wave. Nevertheless it
rose up and up on a sudden mountain of water only just visible through
horizontal rain. Ron looked up at the boiling cliff of sea as it broke round
and over the bows, and clung on tight as the floor turned up to forty-five
degrees, then beyond that. He looked back, and wished he hadn’t when he saw
the seven-hundred-metre drop down the length of the ship into the trough. The
stern was now under, cleaving through the sea and throwing up a huge cowl of
water that kept crashing against the deck. Ron tried to ignore the groanings
and crackings he was hearing, then suddenly the bows were in clear air, and
the angle of the ship returning to normal. But the vessel now turned on the
wave’s peak . . . Then it was over, and sliding sideways down the lee of the
wave. Ron found himself clinging to the stanchion with both hands, one foot
braced on a console. Forlam was gripping the wheel, his feet wide spread. A
screen popped out and a waterfall roared into the bridge as the ship bottomed
in a trough.

‘Rudder—other way!’ Ron bellowed.

Forlam started spinning the helm—no strength being required since the rudder

operated by hydraulics. The ship started to present its stern to the next,
smaller wave, and went up over that one at an angle. Another wave, then
another. Now came a shuddering crash as the Sable Keech dropped down in the
next trough. It rose again on a wide swell, crashed down again. Staring
straight ahead, Ron observed just how much closer the island now appeared.
Steam was billowing from its volcanic cone, and where once there had been
trees there was now just the wreckage of trees and mud. Eyeing the sea, he
observed lily pads bobbing back to the surface and then reopening their blowsy
flowers.

‘We’re grounded,’ someone announced.

‘Yup, I figured that,’ replied Ron.

‘How we going to get this ship off?’ the same man asked.

‘Ain’t figured that one yet,’ admitted the Old Captain.

* * * *

The giant whelk dipped herself back in the sea, but could no longer detect the
scent trail of the ship she had been pursuing. Heaving herself back up onto
the beach, she gazed towards the horizon with her huge eyes, and experienced a
feeling of panicky bewilderment. This sudden loss of purpose caused almost a
feeling a deflation in the growing lobes of her brain, and she felt the loss
of that, rather than of the scent, as of greater importance to her. But the
ship was not gone—itself or one very much like it would be out there. All she
needed to do was search, keep on searching, and never stop. It then occurred
to her that if she found the same ship, dragged it down and crushed it, chewed
on the crew . . . if she finally achieved her aim, that meant no more aim to
achieve. She blinked, caught on the rusty nail of paradox, not knowing it was
much the same as faced by all thinking beings. Then she swivelled her
eye-stalks to one side, wondering why the horizon there had suddenly risen.

Uncomprehending, the giant whelk watched as a glassy hill of sea rolled
towards her, then some buried instinct had her sucking back in her eyes, and
bunching together her tentacles. The wave, carrying less momentum now than
when it had struck the Sable Keech, picked her up like flotsam and tumbled her
away from the island. Brief chaos ensued, then, drifting below the surface,
the whelk unknotted her tentacles, extruded her eyes again, sucked in some of
the offending water. Strange flavours tantalized her taste buds, and she
decided immediately to track back this phenomenon to its source. Anything
rather than return to her previous plodding and thoughtless existence.

* * * *

15

Rhinoworm:
symbiosis, parasitism and mutualism being a feature of Spatterjay’s fauna, it
is unsurprising that the rhinoworm’s life cycle begins this way. Its eggs are
laid upon the stalks of the sea lily, where they inject tubules to feed upon
the lily sap and thus grow. This stimulates the lily to bloom, attracting the
lung birds that pollinate them. On lily sap the egg grows to the size of a
football, and out of this hatches the four-limbed juvenile rhinoworm. Hatching
takes place at the precise time when the lily is producing its seed pods,
which, being high in protein, are much relished by many varieties of
herbivorous heirodonts. Now the lily benefits from the presence of tens of
thousands of voracious rhinoworms attacking any other creature in the island
shallows in which it flourishes. The worms utterly denude the surrounding area
and, as they begin to lose their limbs and change into the adult form, turn
cannibalistic. Only 10 per cent of their original population will leave the
area as adults. Rhinoworms have four sexes—three separate ‘males’ contributing
three quarters of the genome to the one quarter in the female egg. Only one
other life form on this world uses the same reproductive method, but no
kindred spirit results, since rhinoworms are the main diet of that other arm:
Spatterjay’s famous sails—

Erlin dragged herself to her feet and glanced around with some relief. The
tanks had been well anchored, and—though having spilled much of their liquid
contents across the floor, to mix with everything that had come in when the
sea smashed through the side doors—only two of her reifs had been tossed out
of them. Wading through ankle-deep water, which was swiftly draining into
scuppers all around the edge of the room, she approached the first of the
ejections and, not bothering to bring across the ceiling lift, untangled the
various connections to his body, then picked him up and lowered him back into
his tank, which was still a third full of amniot. She did the same with the
second one, noting how real blood was seeping from splits caused by his recent
violent departure from his tank. Then, seeing that the tank amniot levels were
automatically being topped up, she began checking readouts.

To say they would survive was not entirely accurate since they were dead. But
their trauma had in no way halted or even slowed the work of their
nanofactories. There was something else, though: she felt a tingling soreness
where the sea water from outside had soaked her. It was caused by the vicious
plankton of Spatterjay, and any of the tanks that had taken in some of the
incursion of sea water would now be contaminated with it. She definitely
needed to do something about that, or the work of the nanofactories would be
undone as the reifs themselves served as a food source for the plankton.
Quickly she returned to the wreckage of her work area, found a pack of soluble
tablets of a sterilizing enzyme, and dropped one in each of the twenty-two

tanks currently in use. This stuff might damage the reifs, but that damage
would be limited and swiftly repaired by the nanites already working in their
bodies, and it would certainly kill the plankton. She then checked the
readouts on the remaining twenty tanks, plugging back in a few loose sensors,
but that was all she needed to do until she came to Aesop and Bones, who were
safely strapped to restraint tables.

Inspecting the screens that kept her informed of the condition of the two, she
realized that whatever the problem was here, it had nothing to do with the
sudden storm. Both screens were scrolling what seemed the kind of formulae in
which runcible technicians and AIs dabbled. She shut down Aesop’s screen,
plugged in her own laptop, and sent in a diagnostic check to be sure the optic
plug in the reif’s hardware had not pulled loose. It was seated firm. Turning
the screen back on, she glimpsed the usual diagnostics a reif would access,
before it clicked back to scrolling formulae. Erlin left it alone. She felt no
great responsibility to these two, and she needed to find out what was going
on outside.

‘Wow, now that’s what I call a ride!’ said Janer, who had obviously been
heading for the Tank Room just as she stepped out of it. The Golem, Isis Wade,
accompanied him.

‘What was that?’ Erlin asked.

‘A tsunami,’ explained Wade.

Erlin stared at him for a moment, then enquired acerbically, ‘Could you
elaborate on that?’

‘According to one of the Warden’s subminds, the tsunami was caused by a
kinetic missile fired down into Nort Sea from a Prador warship in orbit above
us. I’m getting no more detail than that. It seems they’re quite busy up
there.’

Erlin turned to Janer. ‘Why am I not surprised about that?’

Janer merely shrugged.

* * * *

‘You all right, lad?’ Ambel asked.

Pillow was looking particularly peeved, and it took the Captain a moment to
realize the reason for this: the junior had lost some of his facial jewellery
when he bounced down the length of the deck and slammed into the stern rail.
But for a Hooper the rips in his face were minor injuries, and closing up
already. Peck’s arm was broken, however, and Ambel saw the mechanic straighten
it out with a crunch, then hold it taut while Anne splinted it. Peck, being an
old Hooper, would only require use of the splint for a few hours.

There were other minor injuries amidst the human crew, but they had been
lucky—Ambel counted heads—that none of them had gone over the side. Now he
looked up and wondered if Galegrabber had survived while grabbing this
particular gale, for the sail was now nowhere in sight.

‘Any sign?’ he called up to Boris, who was surveying die surrounding ocean
through binoculars.

‘Not of the sails,’ Boris replied. ‘But the Moby is still afloat. They must
have got their cables off the sargassum in time.’

Ambel nodded, turning to the rest of the crew, who were now mostly wandering
around the deck in a daze. Their reaction was understandable—none having ever
experienced weather quite that heavy, nor needed to cling onto a deck that was
pitched near vertical. But this disorientation of theirs had gone on long
enough.

‘All right, lads!’ he bellowed. ‘You three—Pillow, Davy-bronte and Sprout—I
want the pumps up on deck and working right now. The rest of you, get down
below and sort out the mess. Get everything that needs drying out up here hung
on lines. Peck, I want you down below checking the racks and cogs. If
Galegrabber comes back any time soon, I want everything ready and working.
Take some hands with you, if you need them. Anne, I want a hull check, stem to
stern—don’t miss a plank.’ They all stared at him, still a little bewildered.
He clapped his hands together with sounds like gun shots, and began striding
along the deck. ‘Come on, this isn’t a bloody holiday cruise! Move your
arses!’ Crew members scrambled in every direction, but some still hadn’t
realized he meant what he said. ‘Pillow, what are you gaping at! I see no
pumps up here!’

‘But, Captain—’

Ambel picked him up by the scruff of the neck and threw him towards the
nearest open hatch. Pillow hit the edge, then tumbled down inside, letting out

a yell as he hit the deck below.

‘Any more questions?’ Ambel demanded.

There were none.

Over the ensuing hours, his crew pumped hundreds of gallons of sea water out
of the bowels of the ship. Lines tied between the masts were loaded with
soaked clothing and bedding. All this occurred to the sound of Anne’s
tap-tapping as she checked the hull’s planking, and the constant clanging and
occasional ‘Buggering buggered up bugger’ as Peck set about replacing one of
the mast cogs which had sheared off all its teeth. Most tasks were completed
by the time evening began to descend, and Boris set about lighting the
recently replaced lanterns all around the deck. Ambel, who had just applied
his Captain’s strength to the task of removing a stubborn cog from its shaft,
came out on deck to see the Moby heading towards them, towed by its ship’s
boat, which was rowed by Drum alone.

When the other Captain came within hailing distance, he called out, ‘I’ll be
coming along with you!’

‘Why’s that?’ Ambel asked.

‘Out that way, the way you’re heading.’ He pointed. ‘Sprage tells me that’s
where the spaceship is. Probably in the Lamarck Trench.’

‘Spaceship?’

‘Vrell’s—that bastard Prador.’

‘I see,’ said Ambel. ‘It caused this?’

‘Nope, seems the other spaceship did that,’ Drum replied.

‘Uh?’ was Ambel’s response.

Drum explained what he had learnt from Sprage about Vrell, and about the new
spaceship above them, and what it had already done and might yet do. Even more
so now, Ambel wanted to get to Erlin. He was grateful when, in the morning, a
bedraggled Galegrabber and the Moby’s sail returned, with muttered curses, to
occupy their masts.

* * * *

It took Janer a moment to recognize the vicious drumming sound. Clutching a
glass of a more refined version of seacane rum than he was accustomed to, he
stepped out of the bar area recently opened on the first level of the stern
deckhouse. Glancing to one side, he noted some of Bloc’s Kladites—probably set
to watch those frequenting the bar—now peering over the side. He moved to the
rail to take a look himself, then halted. There was something sitting on the
rail.

It looked like a partially plucked crow that someone had nailed in place
because it had been dead for a week or more. Then it turned its head and
regarded him with pink, blind-looking eyes, before honking loudly and winging
raggedly away. It left behind it the stink of decay.

‘Lung bird,’ explained Ron, stepping up beside him.

‘I know what it was,’ Janer muttered.

‘We’ll have to get off here soon, before things get too hectic,’ Ron added.

‘Hectic?’ Janer queried. ‘Because of lung birds?’

Ron led the way to the rail and pointed a thumb downwards. ‘No . . . them.’

Janer peered over the side to see one of the hull laser turrets swinging back
into its hold position. Pieces of some pink anguine form thrashed, still
steaming, in the sea, then a shoal of leeches dragged them down. Janer
squinted, puzzled, sure that he had seen a limb amongst those remains, yet the
swarming creatures were rhinoworms, which were limbless. Further along, he saw
another laser turret fire, then distantly he heard one from the other side of
the ship.

Ron pointed out towards the lily-like plants all around the ship. ‘Breeding

area, that. There’ll be thousands of the leggy buggers.’ He took his comlink
from his pocket and spoke into it. ‘How we doin’ there, John?’

From the link a tired voice replied, ‘I will get it, but I can’t give you any
estimate on the time. The programming is rather convoluted.’

‘Okay, keep at it.’

Ron put the link away, then seeing Janer’s querying expression said, ‘Bloc is
behaving very strangely and being stupidly uncooperative. He’s refused to give
us access to the ship’s computer systems, even though that’ll get us out of
this mess. Maybe he’s frightened to hand over any further control.’

‘And why would access to the ship’s computer systems help?’ asked Isis Wade,
who had just joined them.

It had been Wade who had kicked in the door and suggested rather loudly that
here were facilities it seemed a shame not to use. He also served the first
drinks, before starting up a metalskin barman that had been stored under the
bar. The place had become a regular watering hole for Hoopers just coming
off-shift from clearing up the mess below—there had been little damage to the
hull itself, much to Captain Ron’s surprise.

Ron glanced at the Golem. ‘As you know, there’s more to this ship than
Windcheater would be happy about. Now, that John Styx is a clever one, knows
more coms coding and programming than probably even you, Wade. He used to do
that stuff on Klader before the Polity AIs got there, and before he fell off a
mountain ... So he tells me.’

‘And the relevance?’ Wade asked.

Ron gestured down the entire length of the Sable Keech. ‘Only the front half
is grounded on the bottom. Once Styx cracks Bloc’s codes, we should be able to
start the engines in reverse, and maybe that’ll pull us back into deep water.’

‘Engines,’ said Janer, nodding. Other Hoopers had already speculated that
might be what was concealed under the enormous sealed housing forward of the
rudder hydraulics. ‘What sort of engines?’

‘The usual kind—does it matter?’ Ron then downed a large slug of rum before

heading back into the bar.

Isis Wade followed the Captain, but Janer stayed observing the two organic
sails, Huff and Puff, winging out over the sea. He watched them for a moment,
then gazed up ahead into the rigging. All the fabric sails were reefed and
everything above appeared skeletal. The Golem sail, Zephyr, stood motionless
like some folded piece of iron equipment affixed on a spar. Janer patted his
hand against the gun concealed under his jacket, and considered the dangerous
game Isis Wade was playing. Should he allow it to continue? He lowered his
hand; any intervention might be provocative in the present uneasy
circumstances. Better instead to wait and watch. He returned his attention to
the sea, and watched Puff scoop up a great spaghetti tangle of writhing pink
shapes. Then he glanced down again and saw a man-length rhinoworm, with thin
newt-like limbs, attempt to climb the hull, before being lasered into smoking
segments. He supposed he should not be surprised that this world had yet to
reveal to him all its teeth.

Returning inside, Janer observed the small group of Kladites now sitting
around a table—probably positioned there to note down the identities of those
who were breaking the curfew Bloc had tried to impose. No one had been
punished as yet, so perhaps Bloc was wary of upsetting the uneasy truce for
the moment. Like the other reifs scattered around the room, the Kladites
sipped through straws pure ethanol drinks to complement the balm inside them.
He had seen Sable Keech do the same, ten years ago, and wondered if they too
possessed the facility to feel or emulate inebriation. He walked past that
table and went over to stand with Erlin, Ron and Wade.

‘I just saw a rhinoworm with legs,’ he commented.

Erlin turned to him. ‘The juvenile form. They grow up in island nurseries,
like this one surrounding us, and lose their legs as they go fully pelagic.’

‘They’re going to give us trouble,’ Janer stated.

‘They don’t mind snacking on each other,’ said Ron. ‘Our problem is that every
time those autolasers hit one, its remains attract even more.’

‘Will there be many of them here?’ Janer asked.

Erlin replied, ‘The adults gather in places like this en masse, and each one
lays tens of thousands of eggs under the leaves or on the stalks of those
plants you see out there. There’s probably millions of juvenile rhinoworms
around this island.’

‘There’s always the thought to consider that we might be better off somewhere
ashore,’ Janer said, passing his glass back to the barman—the metalskin
android was fashioned in blued metal with a flattened ovoid head and scanning
red eyes. It looked like a prill mounted on the neck of a humanoid body.

‘You did notice that they’ve got legs?’ said Erlin dryly.

‘Yeah, but I wasn’t thinking about that. What if that Prador captain above us
decides to ignore the Warden and continue its bombardment?’ The Warden had
lately updated them on recent events. ‘How many more of those waves can this
ship endure?’

‘And where would we go, once we’re ashore?’ asked Ron.

Janer thought about that for a moment: the devastation visible over the
island, the steam rising from the caldera somewhere behind the highest point
on the island.

‘Okay, dumb idea, I guess,’ he allowed.

Janer now considered revealing to Erlin and Ron what he had learnt from
Wade—he trusted these two absolutely and felt the Golem should do the same—but
just then there came disturbing sounds from outside, as of all the lasers
firing at once.

‘Ah, that’s it.’ Ron took out his comlink and strode to the door. Janer, Erlin
and Wade followed the Captain, and this caused a general exodus from the bar.
The racket originated from the sea below, so everyone moved to the rail to
look over. Janer was expecting to witness some massed attack from leggy
rhinoworms, but what he saw was the sea boiling towards the stern, just
forward of the rudder. Large chips of wood kept bobbing to the surface amidst
a spreading slick of sawdust.

‘Is that supposed to happen?’ asked Erlin. ‘I wouldn’t have thought it such a
good idea to make holes in the hull.’

Wade explained for her. ‘The propellers are made of case-hardened ceramal.
They’re mounted on telescopic shafts housed in watertight compartments inside
the hull. When activated, they just bore their own way out through the hull. A
concealed engine Windcheater could make no objection to, but evident

propellers would be a little too much.’

‘How did you know all this?’ Erlin gazed at Ron, Wade and Janer in turn.

Janer shrugged. ‘I didn’t.’

‘Styx broke into the ship’s concealed plan a while ago,’ said Ron. ‘It’s just
the control codes we’ve been after, since.’

‘And this will pull us free?’ Erlin glanced back at the boiling sea.

‘If we don’t run out of power first,’ replied Ron, watching the lasers turn
more of the walking rhinoworms into macaroni.

* * * *

The trench was now right below Sniper and slowly the error messages from his
S-cav drive were blinking out. He descended a cliff that sprouted seaweed
trees in the branches of which shoals of boxies swam like mobile silver
apples. Passing a deep cave, he observed two large eyes watching him, and an
ultrasound scan rendered him the strange image of something like a giant
whelk, sans shell, protecting its softer body in stone like some kind of
hermit crab. Finally reaching the bottom, he scanned at full power with each
of his senses, then again picked up something in ultraviolet.

Prador were riddled with tactical blind spots—it was this that had once
enabled Sniper to defeat a number of Ebulan’s drones, even though they carried
superior firepower and armour—and he suspected this was how he would now find
the hidden spaceship. Doubtless Vrell had concealed it in a deeper part of the
trench, but what the Prador had failed to conceal were the leaking
radioactives, which were thick in the water here. Choosing the direction from
which the current seemed to be sweeping the isotopes, he headed off. Then,
ahead of him, against the base of a rocky underwater cliff, he spotted the
painfully bright glare of some large pill-shaped metallic object.

Sniper scanned his find briefly, quickly realizing it was a dumped fusion
reactor—its casing cracked and the isotope ash of its last faulty burn
poisoning both itself and now its surroundings. Around this object the bottom
was littered with dead and dying creatures: some small varieties of whelk and
bleached-white heirodonts no bigger than a human arm. Checking his records the
drone realized these were creatures whose vision extended into the
ultraviolet. They had been attracted by the light—and it had killed them.

‘Fuckit,’ Sniper muttered, moving on.

The reactor could have been dumped during the journey along the trench, so the
ship itself could be many kilometres from here. Almost with a sigh, Sniper
transmitted his findings to the Warden, then continued trundling along just
above the bottom.

The AI on Spatterjay’s moon responded immediately. ‘You must find that ship
soon. The Prador captain is becoming impatient. His drones and his armoured
Prador have dropped to the stratosphere, and I don’t think they will hold
there for long.’

‘This could be a good sign,’ said Sniper. ‘If Vrell had considered the
possibility of this reactor being found, he’d have concealed it better. It
could be that it was only carried a minimal distance from the ship itself, and
then dumped.’

He now reached the base of a rubble slope in the trench. The remaining error
messages in his S-cav drive now merely concerned his jammed ports. This meant
weaknesses in his armour, but did not mean the drive itself would not work.

‘That is a possibility arising from optimism rather than logic,’ opined the
Warden huffily.

Sniper sent back a U-space raspberry and continued searching.

Halfway up the slope the drone spotted a small shoal of those heirodonts
encountered earlier near the reactor. The water was disturbed and murky around
them as they fed upon something. Admitting the possibility of finding another
human corpse, though by the readings in ultraviolet not a radioactive one,
Sniper motored over.

The heirodonts dispersed, then circled round again—loath to leave their meal.
Revealed was an adult frog whelk, much the size of Sniper himself, its shell
crushed under the edge of a large slab of rock. What remained of its extended
foot still moved weakly, but its eyes were gone and what he could see of its
main body, inside the broken shell, was in tatters. Even while he watched,
more of those same heirodonts fled from cracks in the whelk’s shell. The
creatures would not have been able to feed on the whelk in any other
circumstance. He suspected that having most of its main body eaten had
weakened it sufficiently for them to go to work on its tough appendage.

But there was nothing else important for him here.

Sniper noted another shoal now coming down towards him. That whelk would not
last much longer—would never get the chance to regenerate as did so many of
the animals here. Then it hit him: why was the whelk trapped underneath this
slab? This slope of rubble must be a recent fall—but what had caused it? Yes,
probably the shock wave, but maybe something else. Suddenly back on alert,
Sniper opened his scan all around him. The moment it touched the descending
shoal, that shoal accelerated. These fish were not flesh—they were black and
too evenly shaped—and no creature down here propelled itself by a constant
water jet.

Sniper spun upright, put his S-cav drive online, and accelerated upwards in an
explosion of silt which disappeared amidst more silt rising, as the very ocean
began to shake. Explosions nearby knocked out the cone-field of his drive, and
set him tumbling for a moment. He saw further explosions below turning the
whelk into mincemeat and slivers of shell. The remainder of the swarm of
mini-torpedoes now swerved towards him.

‘Found it!’ he sent over U-space.

Below him an avalanche revealed a rising curved edge of metal, and the
constant blast along the trench from some massive turbine.

‘Get out of there, Sniper,’ the Warden replied. ‘I’ve so far dissuaded our
friend from using his coil-gun, but as soon as he knows about this, I suspect
he’ll change his mind.’

‘That’s my—’

An explosion right next to him again knocked out Sniper’s cone-field, even as
he began to generate it. He scanned for other missiles, could see nothing,
then whipped a tentacle through the dispersing cloud of the explosion and drew
in, through microtubes, a sample for his internal spectrometer.

Ceramic missiles?

Suddenly every moving object around him could prove a threat—missiles fired at
him did not have to be metallic. He blew out a cloud of antimunitions beads

and motored sideways, scanning behind and below for the precise source of the
attack, which had to have originated from somewhere on the rising titanic
spaceship now filling the trench from side to side. However, the focused
ultrasound pulses hit him from above. They struck the end of one of his large
tentacles and tracked in, paralysing that limb then scrambling some of his
internal systems when they reached his main body. He loaded and fired hunting
torps upwards directly towards the triangulated source, which was behind a
spreading cloud of mercury chaff. The source then speared into view, launching
another ultrasound pulse. It was another torpedo.

Sniper veered, angling his course upwards at forty-five degrees away from some
rising monolithic extension of the Prador ship. Rerouting internal systems
knocked out by ultrasound attack, he made for the edge of the chaff cloud, as
his attacker was almost certainly behind it. After firing a couple of torps
towards the further edge of the cloud, these missiles being programmed to go
around it and intercept whatever they found there, he loaded antimunitions.
Rounding the cloud, he opened up with his own ultrasound weapon. He hit one of
his own seeking torps and it blew in a flat explosion. The other one kept
circling, sniffing for prey that was not here. Just then, rather than
communicate, the Warden relayed a recent exchange, compressed to be read at
high speed directly into Sniper’s mind:

‘If you fire now, you will be destroying a seven-hundred-year-old Polity
citizen and ECS employee. You will also kill the crews of two Hooper ships,
the Polity passengers and Hooper crew of another larger vessel—and cause
untold environmental damage.’

‘There is only a drone down there. A few of these Hoopers are not your
responsibility. And these so-called Polity citizens, from what I have recently
learnt, are nothing more than animated corpses.’

‘Nevertheless, I will be forced to employ a U-space weapon, should you fire.
It will certainly destroy the projectile as it leaves the coil-gun, but I
estimate it will also revolve half of your ship’s bulk into underspace then
back out again, inverted.’

Almost to the microsecond of Sniper finishing the package, a torp streaked up
out of the chaff cloud and exploded against his underside.

Where the fuck are you?

Sniper reserved his shots until he saw a clear target. He began motoring
rapidly to the surface, with the pretence of drawing his attacker away from
the chaff cloud. In reality he knew the cloud was a decoy to make him think
the attacker was there. And after the Warden’s message he had no wish to hang
around playing cat and mouse, especially as he seemed to have now taken on the

mouse role. Some five hundred metres above the rising Prador ship he fired two
missiles towards the cliff-side nearest to him, then focused his scanners
below the tumbling rock fall that ensued.

Nothing.

He came up out of the trench, again trying to restart his S-cav drive. It came
close to engaging, then the cone-field collapsed in a cascade of errors. He
put this, and some of the weird readings he was getting on sonar, down to
ultrasound damage. He began motoring to one side to get out of the way of the
Prador ship. It was now elevated above the trench and sliding sideways, tonnes
of rubble and silt pouring from it. Sniper decided he should head for the
surface as fast as he could; at least in the air he would be able to use his
fusion engine. Then something stopped him dead, as if he’d run into an
invisible brick wall.

Invisible.

Sniper remembered the recording from SM12, just before that drone was
destroyed. It had seemed the Prador war drone had moved off very
quickly—because one moment it was there and the next moment gone.

‘Fuck,’ said Sniper, as a huge exotic metal claw folded out of nowhere and
clamped on the forward edge of his shell. ‘Chameleonware.’

The Prador war drone appeared in one rippling wave, and Sniper immediately
fired a contact torp directly towards it. The explosion blasted the two drones
aside in a spinning course. The Prador drone’s exotic armour developed a
glowing dent, but the shock wave, turning him against the gripping claw, bent
Sniper’s armour where it was clamped. A square port opened in the bigger drone
and now a torp slammed into Sniper, causing a similar dent. The big drone
tried to bring its other claw to bear. Sniper wrapped two tentacles around it,
and underwater arm wrestling ensued. Through another tentacle touching the
base of that claw Sniper directed the discharge from one of his inner laminar
batteries, but the instant he did that, a similar shock slammed into him
through the other claw. They were hurtling towards the surface now, born their
drives applied to the same task: the Prador drone to get a potential attacker
away from its ship, Sniper because he did not want to be in the vicinity of an
orbital strike. Despite the shock, however, Sniper still had another option.

‘Let’s see you hang on now,’ he sent.

He initiated his S-cav field, part of it intersecting the other drone, then
opened his tractor drive to full power. Within seconds their speed doubled,

and they continued accelerating. Some tightly focused ultrasound weapon began
gnawing at Sniper’s armour just behind his head. Sniper injected
aluminium-film chaff between, to soak up some of the energy. Then they
exploded from the ocean’s surface. The field stuttered, went out, and Sniper
engaged his fusion drive. That wrench was enough and, peeling away a piece of
Sniper’s armour, the big drone tumbled away, snapped taut Sniper’s gripping
tentacles, then fell again when the Polity drone released his hold. But, with
a flash of white fire, the Prador engaged its own fusion engines and came on,
now firing missiles and lasers.

Employing a hard-field, Sniper smacked the missiles out of the air, and
replied with his APW. Violet fire splashed on his opponent’s hard-field, then
it replied with its own APW blast. Sniper fired a missile which, exploding,
caused a massive directional electromagnetic pulse. He was about to follow up
with another APW blast, hopefully cutting through his opponent’s defences,
which should have been knocked out by the pulse, when the two missiles he had
knocked away earlier tried to hit him from the ocean below, where they had
been waiting for this. One he shot down with a laser, but the other exploded
just underneath him, delivering a similarly disabling EM pulse.

Not such a pushover, thought Sniper.

Reaching then exceeding the speed of sound, the two opponents hurtled over the
ocean, leaving a trail of ionized gas, smoke and falling flakes of white-hot
armour.

* * * *

The coil-gun on the Prador ship was charged and ready to fire, and the Warden
had no way of stopping it other than by firing on Vrost’s ship with
conventional weapons—thus revealing a lack of anything else effective—or by
further bluffing.

‘The seven-hundred-year-old drone is now no longer in the way,’ Vrost informed
him.

Sniper’s departure from the scene had been all too evident, and the Warden
supposed that the old drone was probably about as happy as he could ever be.

‘That still does not negate my original assertion. Vrell’s ship is now much
closer to the Sable Keech and the two Hooper ships, and should you fire, the
deaths of those aboard the three vessels would be certain,’ said the Warden
calmly.

With another part of itself, the AI observed one of the armoured Prador as it
drifted close to one of many orbital eyes, for it was not often that one of
this kind got so close to Polity scanning equipment, and such an opportunity
should not be missed.

Certainly, if the King’s household was organized along the same lines as
others of his kind, all his guards would be first-, second- and
third-children. There were no fourth-children, as any that survived the
ruthless selection process in a Prador brood cave was automatically designated
a third-child. The casualty rate being approximately 90 per cent for each
generation, out of a thousand Prador nymphs in a brood only a hundred would
survive the savage selection process so as to become third-children, while ten
would survive to become second-children, and one would get to be a
first-child. What this ensured was self-evident, for in the lifetime of an
adult Prador, which could be as long as eight hundred solstan years, three to
four hundred broods would be engendered. However, first-children rarely made
it to adulthood since they were generally killed by their father around their
fiftieth year of life, before they could make that final step. This meant
that, at any one time, a single adult Prador should have a maximum of
twenty-five first-children attending on it. Speculation in the Polity had
always been rife about King Oboron and his guard, since the King was older
than any other known Prador, with his first-children numbered in the
thousands, and all of them wearing that concealing armour.

‘Again,’ Vrost replied, ‘Hoopers are not your concern, and the passengers of
that ship are already dead.’

‘I must warn you I cannot allow you to use that coil-gun,’ said the Warden,
groping around for something more to add. ‘And I must also ask whether this
behaviour is what passes for diplomatic relations amongst your kind. Would
your King be pleased with your actions here—and the way you are threatening
the new alliance between the Polity and the Third Kingdom?’

Vrost was a long time in replying, and during this delay the Warden attempted
some gentle probing of the armoured Prador.

The most probable explanation for the current King and his extended family was
that he had discovered some form of longevity but denied it to all but his
immediate kin, and that this same serum, process or surgical technique had
also stalled his kin’s maturation. This had occurred with some of the earlier
anti-geriatric medications used by humans. Specifically there had been a
nanotech process—similar to the nanofactories used by reifications—which had
read the DNA of its host, then perpetually worked to repair any subsequent
damage to that DNA. The disadvantage here was that if the DNA was already
damaged before this reading process, the nanomachines would maintain that
damage. This meant that someone suffering from cancer would then always have
cancer, for any attempt at correction at a genetic level would be defeated by
the nanobots. It also meant that if someone took such treatment while a child,

he or she would then remain forever a child.

The armour was near impenetrable: a thick layer of exotic metal sandwiching
alternate layers of a superconductor and some other reflective exotic metal.
The Warden tried low-level radar and microwave scans, but once the AI upped
the intensity of those, the Prador clearly sensed them, because it turned to
face the nearby satellite eye and projected microwave and radio white noise.
But there remained another possibility.

The Warden slowly began altering the position of the nearest satellite eye, to
bring it away from the armoured Prador but down into the same level of the
ionosphere. Further around the planet, it dropped another eye to the same
level.

‘Prador do not participate in diplomacy,’ Vrost replied. ‘This must be settled
quickly.’

Shit, thought the Warden.

‘Now,’ Vrost continued, ‘that I have obliged you, I would prefer it if you
made no further attempt to scan Father’s second-children.’

One strange piece of information there: the Warden had assumed, by the size of
this armoured Prador, that it must be a first-child. The AI then initiated the
X-ray scan from his further eye, while using the closer eye as a receiver. The
fusion detonation came a microsecond after, converting the armoured
second-child into a glowing ball of gas. The flash knocked out the reception
on most nearby satellite eyes.

‘I repeat,’ said Vrost, ‘attempt no scans.’

Either suicide or remote detonation initiated by Vrost, the Warden realized.
‘My apologies, that scan was initiated before your warning.’

The AI was betting on the Prador not comprehending exactly how fast an AI
could react. For a moment Vrost gave no reply, and the Warden studied the
X-ray picture he had obtained. It was not very clear, but certainly showed
that the armour had not conformed to the shape of the being it contained. That
looked nothing like any Prador second-child.

‘The ocean ship survived the wave caused by my first strike,’ said Vrost.
‘Another strike would only be four hundred kilometres closer and, impacting on
a spaceship near the surface, I have just calculated that its detonation would
not cause so large a wave.’

The Warden found himself all out of bluffs. Either Vrost believed the AI could
use U-space weapons or he did not. There was nothing more the AI could do, and
Vrost, it seemed, did not believe him. The coil-gun fired again.

Tracking the missile down through the atmosphere, the AI made its own
calculations and realized that the Prador captain might just be right, so long
as no weapons or fusion reactors detonated aboard Vrell’s ship. Then something
unexpected happened, and the AI observed the projectile become a streak of
incandescent gas.

‘It would seem that Vrell’s shipboard weapons are perfectly functional,’ the
Warden remarked.

After a long delay, Vrost replied, ‘Yes, so it would appear.’

* * * *

Something cataclysmic had certainly occurred here in the sea. The giant whelk
recognized the signs by something buried deep in her memory. She recollected,
long in the past, grey sulphurous fountains spewing from sea-floor vents
around which gathered strange green prill and enormous pale clams. Near her,
magma had wormed up from the deep ocean floor with a sound like something huge
tearing apart. Hints of its inner glow showed through the immediate crust it
acquired on contact with the sea water, and it hardened into stone pillars
that then toppled one after another. All this had been a curiosity to nearby
whelks, until one of them had ventured close enough to grab one of the clams.
That rash individual was caught in a stray current of water which, but for the
pressure, would have been steam. It died with one long-drawn-out squeal,
before floating upwards inflated by its own cooking gases. The rest of the
whelks fled.

Here, around her now, drifted the remnants of parboiled leeches, cooked-red
segments of glister and hinged-open prill carapaces. Down below she observed
the skeleton of a heirodont and felt a surge of gladness -as she well knew,
such monsters did not die easily, so what had caused this ablation of its
flesh must have been strong indeed. Now all that was left of that drastic
event was unusual warm-water currents cutting through the devastation. But the
ocean was gradually returning to normal and, like herself, its denizens were
venturing into this area to feed on the organic detritus.

First came the turbul, crunching open both shell and carapace to get at the
broiled meat inside. Then came shoals of boxies, swarming like silver bees as
they picked through this cornucopia in the water and juggled clean any pieces
of shell the turbul dropped. Glisters remained distant, keeping well clear of
the whelk herself, but prill she had to perpetually slap away. A heirodont,
half the size of the one she had beheaded, cruised into view then turned
towards her. She prepared her garrotte and waited, as the thing circled twice,
clacking its mandibles. Holding the line out towards it, drawn taut between
two tentacles, she sculled round to stay facing it. Then it attacked.

Her line cut into the slope of its head as it drove her rapidly back up
through the water, then along the surface, kicking up spray from the heaving
ocean. Its mandibles kept groping only a small distance from her body. When it
eventually slowed, she relaxed the line’s tension, sculled neatly round beside
the creature’s head and looped the line around its neck. It was easier with
this smaller attacker than the previous occasion, and the line did not snag on
any vertebrae this time. A second heirodont arrived just in time to see the
whelk pushing off from the thrashing body of her attacker while its head
spiralled down towards the bottom, trailing ichor as grey as any spume from a
volcanic vent. As the second heirodont quickly turned away, she felt joy not
so much because of this victory but because the attacker had propelled her to
this particular area of ocean. For, sticking out her corkscrew tongue, she
savoured a familiar taste in the water.

The ship.

* * * *

16

Molly Carp:
no one really knows how this creature obtained the first half of its name,
though the second part is quite obvious, since the creature’s body resembles
that of a Terran fish called a carp. However, there the resemblance ends. It
propels itself through the sea by gripping the bottom with three rows of flat
tentacles growing from its belly. Fossil evidence indicates that these are a
further evolution of barbels. Molly carp are solitary and territorial
creatures, usually making the shallows around a single atoll their domain.
They can grow up to five metres long in the body, with tentacles extending
down fifteen metres. Hoopers claim that once every three hundred years they
all simultaneously leave their individual territories so as to mate in Nort
Sea. This has yet to be witnessed by any Polity observer, but if it is the
case, then they seem to have adapted well to viral longevity. Rumour and
legend abound regarding these creatures: they rescue drowning Hoopers,
sometimes follow ships for hundreds of kilometres, and like magpies will steal
anything shiny they can lay their tentacles on. It is claimed that one Captain

Alber even trained a molly carp to tow his ship. This Captain has never been
found, so no confirmation can be made. All Polity observers have witnessed are
molly carp haunting island waters, where they are voracious predators of
glisters and prill, occasionally venturing down deeper to unearth amberclams —

Janer peered through the sight of the laser carbine and observed the
adolescent rhinoworms tearing at each other in the island shallows. After
targeting one of them he was about to fire when another surge from the ship’s
engines forced him to step quickly to one side to maintain his balance. Some
of the Kladites on deck, who were making themselves useful by lasering worms
out at sea, were experiencing the same problem. Hooper crew up in the rigging,
as well as having to maintain balance, were also plagued by lung birds which,
apparently sated on nectar from the sea lilies, found the rigging a convenient
place to roost. And they stank. But still lots of rhinoworms had been hit at
some distance from the ship, diverting the attention of many of their
cannibalistic kin away from those the ship’s autolasers were currently
massacring.

Janer stepped back to the rail and peered over.

It was a mess down there. The sea was a soup of chopped up bodies, and of
thousands more come to feed in a struggling mass three-deep up the side of the
ship. Smoke was billowing all along the waterline, the stink of charred flesh
infected the air and, much as he had no love for the voracious denizens of
this planet, Janer was saddened to see their destruction in such numbers. He
turned round and glanced up beyond the Hoopers joyously popping away at
distant rhinoworms. Up there Zephyr hung upside down, his head jerking back
and forth as if tracking every shot. Janer glanced down again, considering
switching to auto-sight—as the Hoopersdoubtless had—which allowed some
correction for the movement of the deck beneath him. Then he shouldered his
weapon and wandered over to the ladder up the side of the midship deckhouse.

‘There has to be a better way than this,’ he said to Wade, who was observing
the mayhem from the roof and occasionally turning to check Zephyr’s reaction
to it.

The Golem looked down at him. ‘There is, and it’s being dealt with now.
Everyone but a small crew is being ordered to remain in their cabins, and all
stairwells and hatches are to be closed. We’ll keep the decks clear
meanwhile.’

Janer climbed up to join him. ‘So even Ron is getting a little tired of this
slaughter?’

‘It’s not that.’ Wade glanced at him. ‘These creatures are only being
attracted to the bodies of their own kind, and that’s why there are so many
around the ship. Left to their own devices, only a few would manage to crawl
up the side and get aboard.’

‘You got that in writing?’

‘We have to try it.’ Wade grinned. ‘According to Ron, if we can lose the bulk
of those now clinging at the waterline, the ship would lift as much as half a
metre.’

‘Have to try what, precisely?’

‘Shutting off the autolasers.’

‘Ah, that’s—’ Janer did not finish, for at that moment Wade grabbed him,
hurling the both of them to one side and down onto the deck. As he sprawled,
Janer heard yelling, saw a shape hurtling down, then felt the deck jounce
underneath him as a Hooper slammed down on it a couple of metres away.
Immediately after, what was left of a Batian weapon hit the nearby rail. The
two struggled to their feet and moved over to the fallen man, who was lying on
his side with his hands wrapped around his head.

‘Are you all right?’ Wade asked.

Janer at first thought that a silly question, until he remembered: Of course,
a Hooper.

With a crunching sound the man unwrapped his arms from his head. His landing
had been a hard one, for the Hooper found it necessary to push one of his
eyeballs back into its socket.

Another crunching sound as he straightened out his leg. ‘Think . . . I’ll be
needing a little help,’ he managed.

Wade removed a comlink from his pocket and spoke into it. This was just a
courtesy to Janer and the crewman, as he was quite capable of transmitting the
same words by his internal radio. ‘Erlin, we’ve got an injured Hooper on the
midships deckhouse, just above you.’

Erlin replied from the link, ‘And?’

‘He fell about a hundred metres from the rigging. He might need a bit of work
to straighten him out, before he heals up flat.’

‘Hoopers don’t fall off masts,’ Erlin replied succinctly.

The Golem peered down at the fallen man, who was now slapping the side of his
head with his one good hand to straighten up his eyeballs. ‘He didn’t fall. He
was pushed.’

Janer looked up to where the Golem sail was crawling down the mast like a huge
iron vampire bat. It was swinging its head from side to side, and a turquoise
glow kept advancing and retreating in its eyes.

‘Shit,’ muttered Janer. ‘What the hell is the matter with him?’

‘Ah,’ said Wade, ‘my other half seems to be experiencing a little internal
dispute.’

‘Might be an idea to move away from here,’ suggested Janer, aware that the
turquoise glow was the emission from a particle cannon being taken on- and
off-line. At that moment the sail let out a long shriek which seemed to
penetrate all the way down the length of Janer’s spine. It then launched
itself from the mast, spreading mono-fabric wings with a snapping sound, and
gliding away from the ship. It turned in mid-air and turquoise fire flashed
down. There came an explosion from below and the sounds of hot metal
skittering across the deck. Janer and Wade ran to the deckhouse rail, to again
see that fire flash from Zephyr’s eyes, this time striking further along the
ship.

‘He seems to have come to a decision,’ Wade observed.

More shots blasted from the sail as it winged around the ship. Janer tilted
his head to listen to the sounds of destruction from the other side. ‘I don’t
think you’ll need to shut down the autolasers—that’s what he’s doing for you.’

‘He’s probably decided they represent Death,’ said Wade, then spoke into the

comlink: ‘Erlin, we’ll be bringing the injured party down to you. Ron, are you
seeing this?’

‘What’s that bugger doing to my ship?’ came the Captain’s reply.

‘Destroying the autolasers.’

‘I bloody well know that. Why is it doing that?’

‘I don’t know, but you better get the hatches locked down and the stairwells
closed, as per plan. Erlin, stay in the Tank Rooms and keep the doors closed.
Are you armed?’

‘I am now.’

Wade indicated the Hooper. ‘I’ll carry him. You watch my back.’

They reached the nearest mainmast stairwell just as Janer saw, down on the
main deck below, the first pink rhino head, sans horns, peering over the rail.
He shot it through the mouth before it got a chance to progress any further,
then himself followed the Golem into the stairwell, engaging the door lock
behind them.

With the Hooper slung over his shoulder, Wade addressed his comlink again.
‘Can’t see what’s going on at the moment, Ron. What’s happening?’

‘We’ve got a few strays coming aboard, but the main mass at the waterline is
dropping away. Gonna fire up the engines in about ten minutes. Ah . . . Huff
and Puff just joined in. Nothing they like better than a bit of fresh
rhinoworm—barring the odd Batian head, in Huff’s case.’

‘Okay, you lot up on the masts, concentrate your fire around any open hatches
or stairwells. We can’t afford to let these bastards inside the ship.’

Janer wondered just when Wade had been appointed military commander of this
ship, and whether that was such a good idea.

Meeting them in the upper Tank Room, Erlin led the way to one of the restraint
tables, this one with its restraints removed and an autodoc folded down
underneath on the end of a jointed arm. As soon as the Hooper was down on his
back, she pulled the chrome autodoc out and up so it was poised just to one
side of the man’s waist. ‘What age Hooper are you?’

‘Hundred twenty,’ he replied. He was staring at the autodoc as if wanting to
get as far away from it as possible. Obviously he was a Hooper who had yet to
stray into the territory occupied by the likes of Forlam or the crew of the
Vignette. Janer understood his feelings, for despite having been operated upon
by such autodocs himself, he was still wary of the things. Perhaps it was some
primordial instinct impinging—the atavistic fear of insects. This particular
doc looked something like a shiny metal horseshoe crab, only with longer legs
which were possessed of more joints and terminated in a variety of surgical
instruments.

‘I’ve got to straighten this leg and that arm.’ Erlin flipped up a lid in the
doc’s back, revealing a small console with a port for a memory tab. ‘If they
heal like that, you’ll be crippled for the next couple of years until they
straighten out naturally.’ Out of her top pocket she took a cylindrical
container and pulled from it thumbnail-sized crystal tabs. Selecting one, she
placed it in the port, then tapped instructions into the console. The tab
contained enough memory storage to encompass a human life—similar tabs formed
the basis of memplants.

‘Is it gonna hurt?’ The man tried to pull himself further away as die doc
wiggled its multitude of legs.

‘I can’t inject you with anything. Even if I could get the injection in, the
analgesic wouldn’t spread quickly enough anyway. But I’ve been well-supplied
here.’ She held up a simple grey cube between her forefinger and thumb. Before
the man could say anything more, she pressed it against the side of his neck.

The Hooper lay there blinking for a moment, then said, ‘I can’t feel me
body—it’s like when I broke me back.’

‘Do you really want to feel it right now?’

‘Guess not.’

Turning to Janer and Wade, Erlin said, ‘I had to make a few alterations to the
nerve-blocker. It needs stronger nanofilaments to be able to penetrate Hooper
flesh through to the spine.’

‘And the doc?’ Janer asked.

‘Programmed for removing reification hardware initially, but I reprogrammed it
to Hooper physiology.’ She closed the lid over the console in which she had
inserted the crystal tab. ‘I’ve been studying Hoopers for quite a while now,
and have operated on many of them. What I just put in here contains everything
at variance to standard human biology from Hooper babies right up to Old
Captains. He’—she stabbed a thumb at the prostrate Hooper—‘won’t need anything
to seal severed blood vessels, only arteries, and the doc won’t touch any of
them. But it will need to clamp open its incisions, and work fast to ensure
the job is done before those incisions start healing while still open.’

‘That’s fascinating,’ said Janer, turning to watch the autodoc swing down the
length of the Hooper’s body, abruptly slice open the man’s trousers, and then
the calf muscle of his mangled leg, right down to the bone. ‘You won’t be
needing any help?’

Erlin shook her head.

The doc was now cutting between fragments of shattered greyish bone that were
already knitting together.

‘Then perhaps we should go back outside and help the others.’ He looked
questioningly at Wade.

The Golem bore a curiously twisted expression Janer could not fathom. Internal
communication? After a moment, Wade nodded and turned away.

‘Best lock the door behind us,’ he suggested.

* * * *

Vrell eased his ship higher in the ocean until its weapons turrets were
completely clear of the surface, meanwhile recharging the massive capacitors
feeding the two particle cannons. He kept his weapons aligned with the
location of Vrost’s ship, ready to again vaporize anything fired by the
coil-gun. Other weapons he laser-ranged on numerous objects dropping through
the atmosphere.

Things were turning nasty here.

Through the senses of his alternate self, Vrell observed its battle with the
Polity drone. Overhearing the latest communication between the Warden and
Vrost, Vrell guessed who that other drone must be, even though it now
inhabited a different shell. Its subsequent familiar tactics confirmed this
suspicion, but the danger it represented was minimal. He was aware of how its
previous attack on this ship had only succeeded by a narrow margin and, should
it try again, Vrell would burn it from the sky. Its previous success had only
been due to Father’s thrall codes being subverted, so that Ebulan, being
attacked by his own blanks, was distracted at the critical moment. Vrell,
however, would not be distracted, and his only vulnerable code transmissions,
to those aboard the ocean-going vessel now only a few hundred kilometres from
him, he could break instantly. Ebulan’s mistake had been in thinking those
codes unbreakable. But Vrell, having ventured into the realm of higher
mathematics, knew no code was unbreakable. No, the greatest danger to him was
still Vrost. He sent a summons to his own drone, and levelled one weapons
array to cover it. He would need all of his resources if he was to survive
this.

The calculations necessary to enable him to make repairs to the U-space engine
were halfway completed. Vrell considered abandoning that pursuit, because to
use the engine he must first get off this planet and well clear of its gravity
well. It did not strike him as probable that Vrost would allow that. However,
Vrell lost nothing by allowing those calculations to continue running, and
some future opportunity might present itself. For the present he would take
measures to protect himself, and those were predicated on the threat to Vrost
of non-existent grav-tech weapons controlled by the Warden and Vrost’s
resultant reluctance to destroy a ship-load of mobile corpses.

Vrell was not optimistic.

* * * *

Stalemate. Sniper pulled away from the Prador war drone, and it pulled away
from him. Assessing the damage done to him, Sniper was quite impressed. His
internal systems were down to 70 per cent, his internal power sources were
half depleted and only a few missiles remained in his carousels. Externally,
his once bright armour was now battered and black, and he was even missing two
tentacles. However, the Prador drone was not in the best of condition either:
it was missing one of its claws, radioactive gas was leaking from a crack in
its armour, and its shape was no longer entirely spherical.

‘You know, shithead,’ Sniper sent, ‘I’m saving a small imploder missile for
that crack in your hide.’ With any luck this would make the Prador drone more
protective of that area, perhaps thus leaving it vulnerable elsewhere.

‘My name is not shithead, old drone,’ it replied. ‘And such cheap ploys will
not work with me.’

‘Right, gotcha. What’s your name, then?’

‘I am Vrell.’

Interesting.

‘Now that’s an odd coincidence.’

‘There is no coincidence—I am a copy.’

‘I see . . . I’m Sniper, by the way.’

‘Then know, Sniper, that we are evenly matched, except in one respect: my
armour is thicker. Should we have finally depleted our respective armouries, I
would have knocked you down onto one of these islands and pounded you into the
ground.’

It sure was a lot more talkative than others of its kind that Sniper had met,
and destroyed. ‘Would have?’

The Prador drone abruptly turned and opened up with its fusion engines,
immediately accelerating away from Sniper.

What now?

Sniper set off in pursuit but, as he did so, he immediately picked up objects
hurtling down from the sky above. Suddenly their fight was no longer an even
match, for Vrost’s forces were coming to intercede. Sniper suddenly felt a
kinship with the fleeing drone.

‘Looks like your relatives have come to finish what we started,’ he sent after
his erstwhile opponent.

‘They make clear targets against the sky. I suspect they will not survive
beyond another twelve point three kilometres,’ the Vrell drone replied.

Sniper abruptly cut his acceleration. Twelve point three kilometres was a
precise figure, and certainly a strange product of bravado. At this elevation,
he calculated, as drones and armoured Prador sped past him, that figure would
bring them over the horizon and in direct line to the present location, within
a permissible error, of Vrell’s spaceship. Using attitude jets, Sniper spun
round, and re-engaged his engines to send him in the opposite direction. At
three kilometres he observed one of the armoured Prador turning in mid-air as
it sped past. It looked something like a gigantic dust mite cast in gold.

‘We will attend to the matter you have left undone,’ it sent contemptuously.

Sniper considered giving these new Prador the courtesy his opponent had just
given him, but rejected the idea. Obviously the Vrell drone had felt the same
kinship as he had felt for it, though given the opportunity it would still
have pounded him into the ground just as he would have gladly given it a
missile suppository. But he felt no such kinship with these others. As far as
he was concerned, Prador killing Prador could only be a good thing, despite
any treaties. Low over the ocean, he turned to observe, right on cue, the
flash of particle-cannon impacts, and molten pieces of drone and golden armour
raining on the sea.

* * * *

Ambel gazed astern through his binoculars, and frowned. The sea was choppy so
it was difficult to tell, but he was sure he had just spotted something in the
waves. Not that this was unusual: since all the life forms on Spatterjay were
long-lived and difficult to kill, it was inevitable that they swarmed
everywhere. And, tacking like this, the Treader was sure to pick up the odd
inquisitive monster—perhaps a rhinoworm then, or a big leech.

‘Something up, Captain?’ asked Boris from the helm.

‘I think we might have an unwelcome guest,’ Ambel replied.

‘Not that bloody whelk?’

Ambel shook his head. ‘Unlikely—I reckon that one’s long gone.’ He headed for
the ladder, clambered down it to enter his cabin, snatched up the holographic
conferencing device, and walked back out on deck. After spending a moment
resetting it to voice only, and then connecting to one other such device, he
asked, ‘Drum. Drum, are you there, man?’

Drum’s reply was immediate. ‘I wondered when you’d be getting in contact. I’ve
been shouting into this thing on and off for a couple of hours.’

‘You’ve seen it then?’

‘Yup, something in our wake. Might be an idea to run with the wind for a while
to lose it,’ Drum replied. ‘This blow is starting to shift the way we want to
go, anyway.’

‘How long ago did you spot it?’

‘Roach spotted something this morning. No one believed him until our sail
confirmed it a few hours ago.’

‘Any idea what it might be?’

‘I dunno—something dangerous by the way Cloudskimmer’s behaving.’

Ambel looked up. ‘Galegrabber! What’s following us?’

The sail lowered its head until it was level with Ambel’s. The creature now
wore its new aug, and since donning it had been very silent and introspective.
‘A big swimming whelk. Its tentacle nearly snagged the rudder on that last
tack.’

‘Why didn’t you buggering well tell us?’

The sail blinked. ‘The search program I ran revealed that no one has yet been
attacked by a swimming whelk.’

‘Erm, and how about your memory?’

The sail looked astern, licking its black tongue around its teeth. ‘My memory
is clear. Yes, I do recollect this individual attacking us.’

Ambel sighed. ‘Galegrabber, this is the real world, right here.’ He stabbed a
finger at the deck. ‘I know what you see in the AI nets can be astounding, and
that the programs you run can reveal all sorts of fascinating facts, but none
of that stuff will help you if something tries to eat you here and now.’

‘Aug trance?’ asked Drum over the link.

‘In a big way,’ Ambel replied. ‘I reckon we should do what you said. Boris,
turn us into the wind!’ He addressed the sail again. ‘And you.’

Galegrabber stared for a long moment, then abruptly jerked up his head and
began to turn both himself and the fabric sails. Boris spun the helm and the
Treader heeled over. Across the link, Ambel heard Drum bellowing similar
orders, and saw that the Moby was coming about as well.

‘Everyone up on deck, and armed!’ Ambel now called out, then returned to his
cabin to inspect a chart spread on the table. If Drum was right, and the wind
did shift to take them back on their original course, then in a few days they
would be reaching an island which was only a number on this chart. He again
considered his earlier thoughts on how to deal with this persistent pursuer.
They required a landfall for that, as they stood no chance against such a
monster on the open ocean. He just hoped the wind did not die, meanwhile.

Back out on deck he observed such crew as were not moving about assigned tasks
all standing armed at the rail, looking astern. He joined them in time to see
a huge iridescent shell break the surface, tentacles whipping the waves ahead
of it, and two huge eyes extruded on stalks to observe them.

‘How ever did it survive that heirodont?’ Anne asked. ‘And how the hell did it
find us again?’

Ambel shrugged. ‘Luck, coincidence, fate?’

As she raised her laser carbine to take a shot at the creature, Ambel stepped
over to push the barrel aside with his hand.

‘You’ll only annoy it further,’ he said.

‘Well, it doesn’t seem that likely to calm down and leave us alone.’

‘Save your shots then for when they’ll really count. In the meantime I want
you and Peck sharpening all our harpoons and checking their ropes.’

‘You want to catch the damned thing?’

Ambel ignored this and held up his conferencing link. ‘Are you listening,
Drum?’

‘I’m riveted,’ the other Captain replied.

Ambel then outlined his plan, and observed the looks of dismay from the
crewmen surrounding him.

‘Has anyone got any better ideas?’ he asked them.

None was forthcoming.

* * * *

The Golem sail had destroyed all of the autolasers, and was now back up on
Mainmast Two, scrambling about as if searching for something while
occasionally letting out more of those piercing shrieks. Janer watched it for
a moment, then focused on what had just slid over the rail and onto the deck
ahead of him. The young rhino-worm resembled a two-metre-long pink newt with a
hornless rhinoceros head. It opened its beaklike mouth and hissed, before
charging him eagerly. Rather than use his Batian weapon, which would also have
smashed the surrounding woodwork, Janer drew his handgun and, with it set only
to standard pulse, opened fire. Drawing white lines through the air between
himself and the creature, two of his shots burned holes through its head,
jerking it up and back. His third shot hit it underneath its head, bursting
some organ there. The creature reared up as if electrocuted, then crashed

down, thrashing about as it sprayed a sticky yellow mess over the deck and a
nearby cabin wall. Before it had even finished its death throes, a shadow
loomed as Huff leaned down over the deckhouse side, clamped the rhinoworm in
his jaws, then flung the creature out over the rail with a snap of his long
neck.

‘Got enough now?’ Janer enquired.

Earlier, he had noticed Huff making a mound of still slowly moving bodies up
on the deckhouse roof—those he did not eat, at least. Janer guessed the sail
was laying in food stores for himself, but even in that there had to be a
limit.

The sail eyed him. ‘I grow sick of the taste.’

‘Understandable.’ Huff’s body was now bloated from his gorging,
suspected he would not be taking wing for some time. Puff, over
deckhouse, had not been quite so greedy for, after feeding only
while, she had concentrated on picking up the encroaching worms
and flipping them over the side of the ship.

and Janer
on the stern
a little
in her jaws

‘Doesn’t it worry you how Zephyr might react?’ Janer asked.

Huff turned and looked up at the aforementioned sail. ‘Zephyr ... is not
right. Death is an absence, not a presence.’

So the living sails understood something of their Golem companion’s
motivations.

‘He still might take a shot at you, to stop you killing those rhinoworms,’
Janer suggested.

‘He does not kill. He cannot kill.’

Janer did not even bother to dispute that. Instead, he turned and shot a
rhinoworm that was sneaking over the rail behind him. By destroying the
defensive lasers Zephyr had endangered them all for, had these creatures been
less intent on devouring their kin, they could have swamped the ship. He moved
up to the rail and peered over, noticing how now there were fewer of the
creatures clinging at the waterline. Clumps of them were even drifting away,

fighting with each other over the remains of those hit earlier by the now
disabled autolasers.

‘Do you know where Isis Wade is?’ he asked over his shoulder. ‘I lost track of
him a couple of hours ago.’

‘He is on deck over on the starboard side of the bridge,’ Huff replied, before
heaving himself up and back out of sight.

Janer began walking in that direction, his carbine slung from his left
shoulder and his handgun in his right hand. Just then the ship lurched as Ron
once again started the engines. A grinding vibration shivered up through
Janer’s feet, and he felt the ship move this time, if only a little way.
Walking on, Janer observed red flashes of carbine fire from a group of
Kladites gathered around the bridge on the roof of the staterooms just below
it, and smelt wafts of acrid smoke drifting across the ship. They were
probably huddling there to protect Bloc. All the hatches were locked down now,
all the stairwells bolted shut. Crossing, behind the bridge, over to the
starboard side, he spotted a rhinoworm scuttling down the further gangway, and
was about to take a shot at it when a pursuing Hooper dived onto the creature
and brought it down. It tried to turn on the man, but he grabbed it by the
neck and smacked its head against the planking until it desisted, then tossed
it over the side.

‘Wade?’ Janer asked him.

The man gestured behind himself with a thumb, then went to retrieve a machete
embedded in a nearby wall.

Wade, leaning against the rail, was gazing down. Janer joined him there and
also peered over. A number of the worms were still working their way up the
hull, but none were yet within easy reach of the rail.

‘Do you note their toes?’ the Golem asked.

Janer saw only that the mentioned items were as flat and round as always.
‘What about them?’

Wade pointed. ‘The hull paint has a very low coefficient of friction—enough to
prevent any whelks or leeches climbing it—yet these things still manage to get
aboard. Look.’ He reached down and picked up something to show Janer. It was a
rhinoworm leg, ripped off at the shoulder. ‘See,’ Wade poked at one of the

toes, ‘the structure of these is very like that of an Earth lizard called a
gecko.’

‘Your point being?’ Janer asked. Even though he himself had recently been
shooting these unwelcome boarders, he could not quite accept the callousness
of ripping a leg off one so as to study the toes. That seemed inhuman, which
of course it was.

‘Why would sea-going animals develop toes like that? What use do they have for
them?’

‘You might well ask the same question about the legs themselves. But don’t you
think we’ve got more important concerns?’ Janer gestured up towards Zephyr.
‘Your other half is still rather agitated, and to my mind looks ready to go.’

‘His agitation is a good sign,’ Wade replied. ‘His time as a distinct being is
now conflicting with his madness.’

‘So he won’t fly?’

‘I did not say that.’

Janer wondered how he should best assess this Golem before him. Underneath
that human exterior and emulation, he was not even a normal AI (if there was
such a thing).

‘Are you afraid to make that final decision?’ he asked. ‘I reckon Zephyr is a
danger to the entire ecosphere of this planet, not to forget its financial
system.’

Another rhinoworm poked its head over the rail, and Wade casually smacked it
from view with the leg he still held. Almost as if that one worm had been
holding down the entire weight of the Sable Keech, the roar of its engines
changed, the grinding sound recommenced and continued, as the ship’s
propellers began dragging it back out to sea. They both turned to watch as
clumps of battling worms slid past them towards the bows, bobbing up and down
in the first waves generated by the shifting hull.

Parting his feet to maintain his balance, Janer said, ‘Perhaps I should make
the decision for you?’

‘That will not be necessary.’

‘How can you be so sure? You’re too close to the problem.’

Wade glanced at him. ‘Zephyr will not use the virus . . . not yet.’

* * * *

A cheer arose, and Ron beamed round at his crew gathered on the bridge.

He slapped Forlam on the shoulder. ‘Keep us on this heading until we’re well
clear—a couple of kilometres at least—then take us round and back on course.
On the other side of the island we’ll put on sail and shut down the engines.’

‘What do you reckon Windcheater’ll do about this? We have broken his law.’

Ron tapped a finger against the comlink in his belt. ‘I asked him before we
started those engines. He won’t do anything drastic—just work out how big a
fine the owners of this ship will have to pay. I must go and give Bloc that
good news sometime.’

‘Captain Ron, I think we have a problem,’ said John Styx, who was working at a
nearby corns console.

Captain Ron turned to him. ‘What is it, a leak?’

‘No, a message from the Warden. I would have found it earlier but I was using
this console to break into the ship’s computer system.’ Styx pointed towards
the forward bridge windows. ‘Yes, you can see it now.’ He then pressed a
touch-plate on the console, and the Warden’s voice issued forth:

‘Ebulan’s spaceship, controlled by his now-adult first-child Vrell, is heading
directly towards you. It is just submerged, and presently being attacked by
drones and armoured Prador descending from the upper atmosphere. I do not know
Vrell’s intentions, but him being Prador I suspect they are not amicable.’

‘Oh.’ In the distance Ron could see objects silhouetted against the sky, like
birds or bees, and amidst them flashes like distant lightning. ‘Forlam, take
us to port—quickly now.’

As the Sable Keech turned, Ron noticed dark objects in the sea immediately
below the swarm of activity: blockish columns of metal and rounded turrets,
all generating wakes as they came towards the island and the ship. Having
watched Ebulan’s ship crash, he instantly recognized the upper weapons turrets
of the Prador light destroyer. Ron picked up a nearby monocular, held it to an
eye and kept knocking up the magnification. What he saw confirmed everything
the Warden had told him, but gave him no explanation as to the why of it.

‘Keep us turning. Have we got full power to those engines?’

‘We have, Captain,’ replied the Hooper who was operating the controls.

‘Bugger.’ Ron was still peering at the Prador ship, now very much closer. It
was turning as they turned, remaining right on target. He lowered the
monocular, no longer needing it. Launched from one of the round turrets,
missiles sped up into the sky and detonated high above. EM blast—had to be. He
looked around and noted Styx stepping back from the coms console, whose lights
and screen had just blinked out. Squinting back at the location of the recent
blasts, he saw three objects dropping from the sky: two war drones and one
armoured Prador, which he recognized even at this distance. With a bitter
taste in his mouth he recollected sights very like this from the first century
of his life.

Then, as if in no time at all, weapons turrets were passing on either side of
the Sable Keech before slowing, and it was as if a thunderstorm had enveloped
the ship. With a screaming crash, turquoise fire slashed up into the sky.
Launchers spun on one of the turrets, releasing such a fusillade of missiles
that they cut for the horizon in a seemingly solid black line. Something
detonated nearby, scattering shrapnel across the ocean, and one large fragment
skimmed over the water and into the ship’s side, with a low crump that
shuddered through the deck. Then came a detonation above, and a wave of fire
rolling across the sky. The ship dipped under the blast, throwing people off
their feet. As a brief interval of quiet followed, Ron watched the turrets
rising higher out of the sea, and heard that familiar grinding on the hull.

‘Shut off the engines,’ he calmly instructed. ‘We’ll only be going where this
bastard wants to take us.’

* * * *

He still called himself Vrell, no matter that his body was now made of metal
and his brain was the flash-frozen tissue of a sibling. As he motored back
underwater, towards his other self, his internal systems worked ceaselessly to
repair the damage caused by the old Polity drone, and he refined deuterium
oxide fuel from sea water for his fusion reactor, which in turn was charging
up the depleted capacitors and laminar batteries powering his energy weapons.
He was puzzled by his earlier actions, unable to fathom why he had not led his
opponent within range of those weapons now devastating Vrost’s forces in the
air above him. His action had been allowed because the order for him to return
to the spaceship took precedence over the one for him to destroy the old
drone, but that did not wholly account for his own decision. Perhaps the
bitterness of knowing his own chances of surviving this were little above zero
lay behind his decision to let the old drone live?

Black shapes again streaked past him through the water. Some of the other
drones and members of the King’s guard had followed him into the sea, but they
were no less at the mercy of the ship’s weapons than those above. Reddish
explosions detonated behind him and, over com frequencies, he could hear the
sound of something dying. Then came contact from the real Vrell:

‘Two drones and one King’s guard have fallen into the sea here.’ Vrell sent
coordinates. ‘All have been disabled by electromagnetic pulse. The guard’s
fusion device has not detonated. Destroy the two drones and retrieve the
guard.’

‘As you will.’

The Vrell drone obeyed—he could not do otherwise. However, he was still a copy
of the original Vrell, and therefore not something loaded into a drone shell
and programmed to military service from the moment he had hatched, so was
capable of thinking about the reasoning behind that order.

The guard’s armour having been disabled by EM and still containing a living
occupant, the Prador drone’s initial conjecture was that Vrell wanted a
prisoner to interrogate, yet that did not really gel. There would not be
enough time to break the guard’s conditioning sufficiently to learn anything
useful about Vrost’s plans. The true Vrell might have sought to access systems
in the armour so as to break into Vrost’s com frequencies had it not been that
the Prador above made little attempt to encode them. It seemed it did not
matter what Vrell knew: from an utterly superior position, Vrost intended to
obliterate them. Perhaps curiosity then, just that—Vrell wanting to know, or
rather confirm, what that armour contained? Of course, such speculation was
based on what the drone’s own aims would have been. The real Vrell, however,
had moved far beyond him. The drone could not, for example, see any
possibility of repairing a surge-damaged U-space engine, yet his creator was
obviously making plans to do so.

The water here was still murky from the first kinetic missile strike, and
other clouds of silt and detritus were spreading out from the more recent
explosions. The drone occasionally observed, deep down, turbul and smaller
whelks snapping up animals damaged by an earlier blast. When he saw a molly
carp cruising by in the distance, he felt an instant of fear caused by an
emotional residue of his earlier self. Then anger took over and made him want
to go after the creature to deliver some payback, but the real Vrell’s orders
did not allow for that. The drone watched the molly carp lashing out a
tentacle to bludgeon a passing turbul, cutting it nearly in half before
beginning to chomp it down. Boxies shoaled around the carp, like silver
bubbles from its mouth, as like ship lice they scavenged scraps. But soon the
molly carp was out of sight, and the drone approaching the coordinates Vrell
had sent.

The drone immediately detected three metallic objects on the bottom,
underneath a cloud of silt. Using his magnetometer, he identified one of the
other drones, descended to it, then, from only metres away, extruded a thermic
lance and began to bore a hole through its armour. Nothing came over com
because the EM pulse had knocked out most of its systems, but doubtless its
diagnostic and repair systems, being more hardened to such attacks, were still
working, so it knew precisely what was happening to it.

The lance cut in slowly, for this exotic metal contained superconductive
layers and had to be eroded away rather than burnt or melted. Finally the
lance broke through. The drone switched it off, retracted it, then lined up
his missile port to the hole and fired a torp inside his victim. A jet of fire
and molten debris spewed from the cavity. The Vrell drone disposed of the next
drone in exactly the same manner, then approached the King’s guard.

The armoured Prador’s internal repair systems were more advanced than those of
a drone. It responded over com, threatening, promising, but never begging. It
had seen what had happened to Vrost’s two drones, and assumed itself in for
the same treatment. When the Vrell drone noted the guard attempting to move
some of its limbs, internally he checked the charge of some of his laminar
batteries, then brought an emitter to bear and fired pulses of electromagnetic
radiation at the areas containing the motor controls for the guard’s armour.
When the guard ceased moving, the Vrell drone clamped his own claw around the
limp claw of the other and, blasting up clouds of silt with his turbines,
hauled his captive off the bottom and continued back to the ship.

* * * *

There were now two sailing ships for her to hunt. At first they moved slowly,
and she could easily have caught one of them and pulled it down, but how they
managed to sail against the wind puzzled her, so, after only a exploratory
touch against one of the rudders, she held back. Slowly she began to
understand the interaction of forces involved. The wind was blowing in one
direction, the sails angled to catch it. Logic dictated that the wind should

push the ship backwards. However, the hull was angled partially into the wind,
which was trying to force it sideways through the water. The two forces—wind
and water pressure – squeezed the ship between them, like a slippery stone
between the opposing faces of a claw, so it shot out sideways, and thus the
ship was actually travelling into the wind. This fascinated the giant whelk
and, applying this new knowledge to the deep memories of her own life, her
understanding of the way forces operated was increased greatly. But the
fascination did not last long.

The giant whelk realized that, there now being two prey, she could catch one
of them straight away and still have another to pursue, thus her quest could
both succeed and continue. She was debating with herself which of them to take
down when abruptly both vessels turned. Clearly she had been spotted.
Surfacing for a moment, she observed the two ships speeding away, then she
submerged again, deciding she would go for the second ship, not the primary
target.

This pursuit lasted throughout the day and into the night. The moon gave the
water a mercury sheen above her, and her happiness only increased upon
encountering a turbul missing its tail and thus unable to escape. Forgetting
the ships for a moment, she enjoyed a leisurely pursuit of the fish, before
using her line to dice it into pieces which she easily gobbled down. Again
moving after her original prey, she noticed a repetitive thumping from the sea
bottom. It was a sound recalling unclear memories that elicited unexpected
primal reactions in her body. The taste she then picked up in the water caused
organs inside her to actually begin moving, rearranging themselves. But no,
she was determined not to be distracted—that was all just instinct which would
return her to the bottom and to a life abandoned. But then, for a moment, her
instinct did override intellect, and she found herself banging a tentacle
against her shell and releasing something into the water from glands located
below her eyes. In reply, the sea-bottom thumping from the male whelk
increased in frequency. She shuddered, took firmer control of herself, closed
up the glands, and moved on.

* * * *

17

Peartrunk Trees:
only the trunks of the younger trees are bulbous at the bottom—i.e.
pear-shaped. As these trees age and expand, they develop splits that grow
wider until the trunk resembles a cage. The trunks are coated with a thick
scaly bark that is the preferred diet of land-dwelling heirodonts. The
branches spread out in a wide crown, each one of them terminating in knotty
tangles of black twigs from which sprout sparse green-and-blue leaves. This
plant produces no fruit or seeds, rather sheds one or more of the twig knots,
which then grows into a new tree. Diversification is caused by the tree

internally shuffling the alleles in each twig knot. But the strangest thing
about the peartrunk tree is its symbiosis with the Spatterjay leech. They, for
reasons not clearly investigated, immediately head straight for a peartrunk
tree when they come ashore, and roost in its branches. Occlusions through the
wood of the branches contain material similar to muscle. When a land heirodont
then begins tearing off the bark, the tree sends signals through a primitive
nervous system to its branch muscles which shake leeches down on the heirodont
to drive it away. Older trees are the most sensitive, and it takes only the
presence of animal body heat anywhere near to the trunk to cause this
reaction. No one knows why, but older trees are populated exclusively by the
permanent land leeches—

The blanks in the holding area were immobile, since most of their mental
capacity was running the calculations Vrell needed to make for undertaking
U-space engine repairs. Now that those calculations were nearly complete, he
dropped four of the blanks out of the circuit. These were the ones who were
still reliable, as they were not so badly suffering from the effects of
starvation and from the havoc the Spatterjay virus was wreaking on them. He
sent them trudging to the engine room, watching them closely through cameras
in the corridors for signs of any unprogrammed movement. They appeared not to
be doing anything outside of his control, but he knew they were fast
approaching the time when they might reject their spider thralls. Satisfied at
seeing them then begin the tasks he had programmed in—detaching all the optic
and S-con cables in preparation for opening the engine casing—he turned his
attention to his channel to the ship above.

The remaining blanks nearby, and those spaceship systems he had employed in
the same mathematical task, should complete the calculations in a matter of
hours. He did not really need the two minds of Aesop and Bones in the sailing
ship above for that purpose, but another task had occurred to him.

Ebulan had died because of his perpetual underestimation of the opposition,
and Vrell had no intention of being so arrogant and stupid. Above him lay a
shipload of reifications and Hoopers, which Ebulan might have ignored as
irrelevant but which Vrell considered a danger that must be either neutralized
or otherwise distracted. Vrell had already subtly manipulated Taylor Bloc into
refusing to give Captain Ron access to the computer system, thus delaying the
departure of the Sable Keech long enough for Vrell to get underneath it.

Bloc was the key, and now it was time for less subtle manipulation. That reif
was full of bitterness and anger and, in human terms, not entirely sane. He
possessed an overwhelming need to control which stemmed from a similarly
overwhelming desire for adulation. At one stroke Vrell shut down Bloc’s
consciousness, causing the reif to slump from the edge of his bed to the
floor. Then the Prador began making some alterations to Bloc’s mind. Once he
finished, Bloc would have to obey the Prador’s orders, though he retained free
will in everything else. Vrell watched through Bloc’s eyes as the latter awoke
and struggled to his feet.

‘Who are you? What are you?’

Vrell did not deign to reply just then. He linked through the now-clear
channels in Bloc’s mind, and gazed through the eyes of Aesop and the visual
receptors of Bones. After a moment, he returned to Bloc both his mobility and
the reif’s control of the others.

‘Secure your ship. Prevent any aboard from moving against me,’ Vrell finally
ordered.

‘You are Prador.’ Bloc’s observation contained something like yearning, and
Vrell realized this stemmed from the reif’s fanatical interest in Prador
thrall technology—control technology. Ignoring the further flood of questions
that ensued, he turned the bulk of his attention to another matter in hand.

Despite his present desperate circumstances, Vrell was determined to confirm
his suspicions about the King’s guard. The Warden had also obviously been as
curious, hence Vrost’s action in destroying the one who had drifted too close
to one of die AI’s satellite eyes. The armoured individual now in the drone
cache had not detonated for one of two reasons. Either the EM that knocked it
out of the sky had fused the relevant circuitry, or else Vrost somehow knew
exactly the guard’s location and was awaiting an opportune moment to send the
destruction signal—probably when Vrell himself put in an appearance. There was
only one real way to find out.

The Prador heaved himself up off the floor and, with his tool chest trailing
along behind him, headed out of his sanctum. He noted, as he travelled the
dank corridors of the ship, how the omnipresent lice remained somnolent on the
wall, only shifting a little on sensing his presence. Lack of food again. He
himself had not eaten for some time, and for longer there had been little for
the lice to scavenge. Now suddenly aware of his own hunger, he summoned the
two leech-headed blanks from where they had collapsed in the corridor outside
the holding area. They joined him just as he reached the door to the cache,
where he picked one of them up in a claw and began tearing it apart and
feeding gobbets of its flesh into his maw. As he ate he noted how much longer
his claws had now become, and how their colour was a translucent black like
some kind of glass. Then he entered the cache itself.

Vrell first eyed what was left of the hooder, squirming over near the portal.
It seemed more lively than before, looked longer and thinner, and gaps were
growing between its segments. The Prador decided it might be quite a good idea
to dump the thing outside sometime very soon, then turned his attention to his
prisoner.

The King’s guard was down on its belly with its legs folded underneath and its

claws stretched out slack on the floor before it. Its armour seemed to conform
to the pear shape of a Prador first-child, but now, on closer examination,
Vrell saw that it was just too big for that. A Prador of this size should be
an adult, and therefore lacking some limbs. This one seemed to have all its
legs and both its claws, and doubtless, underneath, all its manipulatory arms.
Vrell speculated on the possibility that some of these limb casings might be
empty of arms or legs, and instead wholly motor-driven. He would not know for
sure until he took a look inside it.

After opening his tool chest, Vrell removed a powerful short-range microwave
scanner, and began running it over the golden carapace before him. Soon
ascertaining which areas of the armour shielded no vital systems, he summoned
his drone over with a thought.

‘Cut here,’ he directed, stepping back.

The drone extended its thermic lance, which ignited with an arc-light flash.
Soon the room was full of metallic smoke, and fans hidden in the ceiling began
automatically drawing it away. The guard tried moving its claws and legs, but
they only quivered a little. It would, in a moment, realize that there was
only one way it might survive, and that would be without the encumbrance of
dead armour. Vrell felt some satisfaction when he heard the sound of locks
disengaging. He silently relayed another instruction to his drone, and moved
further back.

The armour opened with a sucking crump, the entire upper carapace rising on
silver rods, then hinging back. The ejection routine was fast, compressed air
blowing the occupant’s limbs from their casings. But not fast enough: as the
grey and distorted Prador head lifted on a ribbed neck, and one claw and the
legs on one side pulled free, the drone repositioned the lance and drove it
straight into its grey body. The guard screamed, trying to bring to bear a
short assassin-spec rail-gun. The drone snipped that manipulatory arm away,
closed its claw on the creature’s neck, and drove the thermic lance deeper
into its body, searching out the major ganglions. The guard kept struggling
and screaming for some time, green blood and smoke issuing in gushes from its
mouth and over its grating mandibles. Eventually its struggles diminished, but
never entirely ceased. Vrell knew that, unless this body was utterly
destroyed, it would regenerate, though into what was open to speculation.
After the drone dumped it down on the floor, beside its armour, Vrell moved
over to investigate.

The Prador was almost the same size as himself, and its mutation quite
similar, the only differences being its lighter colour, the saw-tooth edges on
its legs and a thicker carapace around its neck. Was this what Vrell would
eventually become? Next he turned his attention to the armour.

The fusion bomb was easy to locate and remove. It did not require disarming
for the EM blast had completely fused its U-space receiver. It was also

accessible to the armour’s occupant, so clearly the latter was not expected to
try shutting it off. This meant that these guards were utterly loyal to their
chain of command, leading up to the King himself, which indicated pheromonal
control. What then was this creature? What was Vrell himself? Were they
adolescent or adult, or something else entirely?

Stepping back from the armour, Vrell studied it long and hard. He considered
carefully all that its occupant implied—what it meant to the Kingdom and where
he himself might fit in, if at all. Eventually he began to turn away,
realizing at last the truth of his situation. He would not survive to leave
Spatterjay in this ship, even with the U-space engine repaired.

He must die.

* * * *

The Warden dispatched a recording of all recent events through an open link to
Earth, and thereafter kept the leading AI up to date with current events.
Earth Central could do nothing about what was happening here, except make
promises of retribution.

‘I am in contact with Oboron,’ the Earth AI replied. ‘Obviously there is more
to this than we suspected.’

No shit, thought the Warden, privately.

As a result of five coil-gun projectiles obliterated by Vrell’s particle
cannons, incandescent gases billowed in high atmosphere. The blast from the
second from last projectile, had it struck Vrell’s spaceship, would also have
smashed the Sable Keech into burning fragments and scattered them across
kilometres of ocean. The last projectile would have left little of the ship
but ash, since when it was fired its target was parked right underneath the
sailing vessel. Both missiles would have resulted in a wave sweeping past the
island to strike the two approaching Hooper ships with the force of a bullet.

There seemed little doubt: the moment Vrell’s weapons were fully engaged
defending himself from Vrost’s troops, that coil-gun would fire again, and
then again. The Warden could do nothing. By his actions, Vrost had called the
AI’s bluff.

Vrost, of course, could not resist commenting on this. ‘I must assume then
that you have decided not to use your U-space weapons against me?’The

translated voice of the Prador was flatly devoid of emotion, but the sarcasm
was implicit.

The Warden replied, ‘I am consulting with Earth Central on the matter, and EC
is talking to your King. I estimate it will take a few more hours before Vrell
is completely engaged with your forces, and therefore before you can make an
effective coil-gun strike. By then I will have received my instructions.’

‘I see,’ said Vrost. ‘I was beginning to think that perhaps your U-space
weapons had malfunctioned.’

Screw you and the horse you rode in on.

The Warden felt brief disquiet at his own angry reaction, for that seemed very
like something Sniper would say, then assigned this pointless banter to a
submind and turned his attention to communication with Earth Central.

‘Oboron was apparently unaware of Vrost’s actions there, and is now attempting
to open a communications channel. But he is apparently experiencing some
difficulties in that respect.’ The Earth Central AI’s sarcasm was all too
evident. ‘I would suggest, however, that the King is in constant com with
Vrost. I am therefore about to inform Oboron that Vrost’s actions will not be
tolerated. ECS beta-class dreadnoughts, though some distance from Spatterjay,
are in a position to intercept Vrost’s spaceship upon its return to the Prador
Kingdom. I suggest you meanwhile raise the underlying issue here with Vrost.’

The Warden acknowledged that, and returned his full attention to communicating
with the Prador captain. His submind was saying, ’. . . I am attempting to
adjust U-space targeting so as not to completely obliterate your ship, but
those adjustments are very finely—’ The Warden absorbed the temporary mind in
a microsecond, and in another microsecond scanned the previous exchange for
anything of relevance. Word games: bluff from his submind and contempt from
Vrost. Allowing a pause of some seconds the AI continued, ‘It occurs to me,
Vrost, that with your warriors and drones in the sky, and your ship in
constant orbit, Vrell is unlikely to ever be leaving the planet. This being
the case, I have to wonder at your anxiety. What is so dangerous about one
post-adolescent Prador, that you need to kill it so quickly, despite risking
the ire of Earth Central in doing so? We can surely wait until he attempts to
leave, and destroy him once he is clear of the ocean and collateral damage
minimized?’

A long pause ensued. Doubtless Vrost was speaking to Oboron and learning what
lay in store for himself and his ship once he left Spatterjay. Clearly there
was something Oboron did not want the Polity to learn about Vrell, but would
the King want to sacrifice so large a ship as Vrost’s to that end, or—the
Warden now considered Vrost’s destruction of that guard—allow that ship to be

captured and its occupants studied?

After a few minutes the Warden detected the coil-gun powering down, then
watched it fold back into Vrost’s ship.

‘Agreed,’ said the Prador captain. ‘I have finally managed to open a
communication channel back to the Kingdom, and received instructions from
Oboron. He has informed me that I must make this particular task my primary
objective, rather than those other matters concerning me. My anxiety was due
to my wish to quickly complete this chore.’

Other matters. Yeah.

‘I appreciate your cooperation,’ the Warden replied.

Then, utterly to the AI’s surprise, he observed Vrost’s other forces
withdrawing out of range of Vrell’s weapons. It seemed the storm had paused.

* * * *

Erlin gazed down at the sea, eyeing the countless remains of marine
denizens—most of them adolescent rhinoworms—floating on the surface. Clearly
the underwater battle had been just as vicious as the one in the sky. Though
it was night and Coram had yet to breach the horizon, she could see everything
clearly. Even the ship’s lights looked dim in the glare of the luminous clouds
smeared across half the firmament. As she gripped the rail, her expression was
stormy. She guessed at the cause of those clouds—the kind of weaponry recently
employed from orbit, and fortunately negated—and how close they had all come
to extinction. But now the dark weapons turrets of the Prador ship were still,
and she could no longer hear the sound of distant thunder. Perhaps they had
made a truce, but it seemed more likely to her that they had run out of ammo.

Erlin knew her cynicism was due to weariness and frustration, though not
necessarily unfounded. But she was busy—and that was important to her. She had
spent many hours going from cabin to cabin, checking on the reifications.
Though most of them could tell her if they needed help, a proportion of them
possessing older reification hardware had been knocked out by the EM overspill
from the surrounding battle. A steady stream of reifs had been going into the
tanks, for their by-no-means-certain resurrection. One nanochanger had
completely dissolved a reif and filled that particular tank with a slimy mass
of intestines. But that was the least of her problems.

She assessed all they thus far knew: Vrell was alive and well and parked
directly beneath them in his father’s spaceship; a larger vessel had then
arrived from the Kingdom with the obvious intent of turning Vrell into Prador
kebabs while the Warden had been trying to prevent collateral damage.
Communication with the AI up on Coram had been intermittent at best, and even
when they achieved it, the Warden did not have much to say. The AI probably
felt that informing them they were about to die would only prolong the general
anguish. The planetary server was also not doing so well and, what with the
same EM interference that had done for the reifs, the Sable Keech’s com system
was down too. But the attack had ceased, so what now?

‘Thirteen!’ Erlin bellowed.

Perhaps trying to find out more might be an unwise move. Really she should
just head for her bunk, as had been her intention.

‘Thirteen!’ she bellowed again.

‘I’m here.’

The seahorse drone rose up beside the ship and hovered before her, glinting in
the light of the burning sky.

‘I thought you’d gone,’ said Erlin. ‘This is not exactly the safest place to
be at the moment.’

‘It was safer here than trying to get to elsewhere. Even though I am small,
Vrell’s systems would still have detected me and shot me down.’

Erlin observed the water dripping from the drone’s iron-coloured skin. ‘You’ve
been down to Vrell’s ship.’

‘Vrell’s internal security is good, but not that good.’

‘Anything to report?’

‘I managed to slip inside through a damaged section of the hull. Vrell is in
serious trouble. Not only does he have one of his relatives intent on

obliterating him before he can leave the planet, but he cannot leave anyway.’

‘Explain.’

‘He has some of the Vignette’s crew working on the U-space engine. I scanned
it. It’s damaged and I very much doubt he possesses the facilities to repair
it,’ replied the drone succinctly.

‘Vignette?’ asked Erlin.

‘Ah, you don’t know,’ said Thirteen, then explained.

Erlin contemplated the situation. Ron, having fought the Prador in that
long-ago war, and being simply what he was, an Old Captain, would not be at
all pleased. And certainly, knowing Hoopers were enslaved in the ship below
him, he would want to act. She herself understood the horror of the situation,
and realized that something must be done.

‘The rest of the Vignette crew?’ she asked.

‘They are secured in a holding area, their thralls keeping them somnolent.’

‘And Vrell himself?’

‘As far as I can ascertain he is working in the drone cache. I avoided him
completely—evading the spaceship’s security systems was difficult enough.’

Erlin nodded. ‘Why’s the shooting stopped?’

‘I do not know.’

‘Then ask the Warden.’

The drone bobbed in the air, as if undecided, then agreed: ‘Very well.’ The

delay before the drone’s next utterance was brief. The voice, however, sounded
different. ‘Ah, Erlin, you seem well enough after your recent adventures.’

‘Thank you so much, Warden. Now perhaps you can update me somewhat on current
events?’

Still speaking through Thirteen, the Warden replied, ‘Vrost, the Prador who
recently turned this area into a war zone, has desisted for the moment. How
long this will last is open to conjecture.’

‘And what are we supposed to do, meanwhile?’

‘Do you have by chance any religious inclinations?’

‘None at all.’

‘Then any suggestion that you pray would be wasted. I will let you know if
there is any means I can use to get you out of this trap.’

The light advancing and retreating in its eyes, the drone jerked as the Warden
suddenly withdrew.

To Thirteen, Erlin said, ‘Wade tells me there’s a submarine aboard. Maybe,
with that, something can be organized to rescue at least some of the
Vignette’s crew?’

‘The hull of Vrell’s ship is only three metres down,’ the drone told her.

‘Just breather gear or good lungs should do then.’ She pointed to the dead
creatures floating in the sea. ‘It’s not very lively down there at the moment.
Tell Captain Ron I’ll join him on the bridge shortly. I’m sure we can work
something out between us.’

The drone drew back a little way, as if mulling over her suggestion. Erlin
sniffed and wrinkled her nose. A putrid odour had infected the air. Somewhere
close by was a virus-infected reif. Then Thirteen swivelled abruptly and
bellowed, ‘Watch out!’

Bony fingers closed around her throat, dragging Erlin back from the rail.
Another skeletal hand opened before her face, extending blades from its
fingertips. Then a blinding flash of ruby light cut the air, and she saw
Thirteen fall from sight, canted to one side with steam pouring from it.

‘Yes, let’s join Captain Ron on the bridge,’ said Taylor Bloc, from the
shadows.

Aesop, clutching a laser carbine, stepped over to the rail and peered down
into the sea.

‘Fragile hardware,’ he commented.

‘Yes, Polity technology often is,’ agreed Bloc, as he stepped hideously into
view, five of his Kladites crowding behind him.

Erlin at once realized Bloc had not been looking after his physical condition.
She also knew what it took to bring down a Polity drone like Thirteen. She
remained silent about both matters.

* * * *

Over a wide area, few creatures were moving. The underwater shock waves had
ruptured leeches, prill and glisters; EM pulses had disrupted the senses of
other bottom dwellers; and infrasound and ultrasound weapons had done for the
remainder. However, right beside two downed Prador drones, a silvery eye
extruded on a stalk from the settling mud.

Even though chameleonware had always been the form of concealment favoured by
the Polity, Vrell, having installed such tech in his own drone, had expected
no less from his Prador attackers and so had designed a defence to counter it.
The attacking drones and armoured Prador had indeed used chameleonware, which
was surprising to Sniper, but Vrell used EM pulses to disrupt the ‘ware long
enough for any attackers to be detected and destroyed, and the ‘ware, not
really being efficient in a medium like water, Vrell’s torps had homed in on
the holes it created. However, there remained one hole in Vrell’s defence:
conventional concealment.

Since his chameleonware would conceal him neither in the sky nor sea,
approaching that way would have been suicidal. However, the mud beneath lay

metres deep and, clinging to the rocky bottom below it, the old Polity drone
had been able to drag himself, so far undetected, to within a few kilometres
of Vrell’s ship. Now it seemed the battle was over, there being no disrupting
EM pulses coursing through the water. But Sniper was not fooled: the line of
detectors might be a few kilometres behind him, but they would still pick up
his absence in the water if he emerged from the mud and turned on his ‘ware.

‘What do you hope to achieve, Sniper?’ enquired the Warden over U-space com.

Sniper paused and considered numerous foul responses. Instead he chose to be
reasonable. ‘If I can get to Vrell, this could all be over in the time it
takes me to pull off his legs.’

After a pause, the Warden replied, ‘Continue, then, and inform me the moment
you are aboard his ship—should that remote possibility occur.’

Sniper retracted his eye and dragged himself onwards. Only another ten
kilometres to cover.

* * * *

The bar had no closing time. As rhinoworms were no longer trying to scramble
aboard, and no local monsters seemed likely to try while the Sable Keech sat
on a bloody great Prador spaceship, Janer decided there was nothing else for
it but to enjoy a good drink or two then head for his bed.

‘If Zephyr tries to leave now, Vrell’s weapons would destroy him,’ he observed
to Wade, sitting opposite him at the table.

‘This is true,’ said the Golem.

‘What was your plan then?’ asked Janer. ‘If our friend had not appeared below,
and Zephyr did head off?’

‘Follow him and try to dissuade him from his course, then if all else failed,
destroy him.’

‘It all sounds wonderfully simple, except for one problem. You can’t fly.’

‘Wrong, Mr Anders. I keep an AG harness in my cabin.’

Janer took another slug of rum. ‘Just one?’

‘Yes, just one.’

Janer liked Isis Wade and understood some of his motivations, but his trust of
the Golem remained limited. Wade was here, apparently, to heal a rift in an
ancient hive mind’s personality and, failing that, to altruistically prevent a
catastrophe which the other half of that personality might cause. That all
sounded fine, but how close to the edge would Wade play it? Would he wait
until Spatterjay and all its inhabitants were teetering on the edge of
disaster? Would he wait too long and be unable to prevent Zephyr using the
virus? Janer realized that if Zephyr flew and Wade pursued, he must somehow
follow as well, but he was not sure how he could manage that.

Then other matters intruded. The ship’s intercom gave an ersatz crackle and
Ron began to speak. ‘All passengers and crew must return to their cabins for
the duration of the current crisis. This order comes direct from Taylor Bloc.
Anyone seen on deck or in the ship’s corridors will be shot on sight and
tipped over the side . . . and that includes all you Hoopers out there. Go
immediately to your cabins, and stay there or answer to me. Janer Cord Anders
is to report to the bridge.’

‘What the fuck?’ murmured Janer, inevitably.

Reifications were getting up from the nearby tables. None of them could show
much in the way of expression, but Janer guessed they must be scared. It
seemed Bloc had finally gone completely power crazy, and the ancient
expression control freak now occurred to him.

‘So, what do we do?’ he hissed to Wade.

The Hoopers were leaving as well. They could have quite easily dealt with any
Kladites on deck and were probably not much concerned about anything else Bloc
might do, but he knew that there were few Hoopers who dared risk Captain Ron’s
wrath.

‘You will go to the bridge,’ said Wade, his head tilted to one side as if he

was listening to something. ‘And you will do nothing with that nice little gun
of yours, no matter how tempting that might seem.’ Wade smiled tiredly. ‘Of
course, even Zephyr and myself have been experiencing problems after the
recent EM emissions, so I very much doubt that any of the security systems are
still operating below decks.’

‘So?’ said Janer.

Wade held out the flat of his palm. ‘It won’t be your concern, Janer.’

‘What are you on about?’

‘You had better go now. You’ve just half an hour, and the bridge is not that
close.’

Janer swore, got out of his chair, and headed for the door.

* * * *

Drooble and Shalen stood behind the Prador, handing it the tools it required.
Orbus and Lannias stood back against the wall, out of the way but ready should
Vrell summon them. Orbus blinked, comprehending the scene from inside the
rigid Prador grip on his mind, like a glister wrapped in the tentacles of a
giant whelk. When he managed to fix his mind on the contents of the engine
casing, comprehension fled him for a moment, for there were things in there
that twisted out of human perception, but it returned even stronger as his
gaze fell away.

I’m beating the thrall, just like Captain Drum did, he realized.

Keeping his eyes averted he peered down at his hands and tried to move them.
Nothing for a moment, then, as if his right forefinger suspended the full
weight of a man, it slowly eased itself out from his thigh. He snapped it back
down, his eyes facing forwards, when Vrell abruptly turned and himself
selected from the tool chest something that seemed to bleed shadow. Orbus
realized, by what feedback he could understand through the controlling link
from the Prador, that the creature was not fully repairing the engine. He
sensed the shifting of plot and counterplot in an incredibly complex mind, but
could understand no more than that. Eventually, however, the Prador was
satisfied. Hissing, it drew back from the compartment and its hinged upper
half closed down on the incomprehensible components inside it. New orders then
came through the Captain’s thrall, and with Lannias he stepped forwards to go

to work.

Orbus reached out, unhooked an optic cable from where it had been tied to the
framework above the U-space engine, and plugged it into the casing. Reaching
for the collet that fully engaged the cable, he then paused for a moment. The
itchy dug-in tic-like irritation at the back of his neck felt unbearable, but
maybe now he could do something about it. With a huge effort he lifted his
hand away from the casing. He found the further he moved it, the less effort
he required, as he eroded the control over him. Finally, his hand poised at
the back of his neck, he ground his nails in hard, scratching through skin and
flesh down to the multi-legged cylindrical device beside his spine. The relief
was immense—this was an itch he had been unable to scratch. Sighing, he
glanced drunkenly round at his fellows, his mouth clamped shut to stop his
leech tongue from escaping.

Their skin was dark blue, and they all possessed leech tongues, too. Lannias
had a forehead now divided into segments, and Shalen’s face jutted forwards as
if turning into something bestial. But with robotic precision they all
continued reattaching the optic and power feeds, and reinstalling the support
equipment. Only Drooble, right next to him, showed any hesitation in his
movements. And Orbus noticed a small scabby split had appeared in the back of
the man’s neck, over his thrall.

As he placed an optical amplifier against the casing and began pulling the
clips across to hold it in place, Orbus considered his present situation. He
had known something like this might happen, having heard Drum’s story, but
what now? He was only moments away from being able to pull the thrall from his
own neck—its control of him now slipping away. Afterwards, he could continue
with the job in hand without any noticeable interruption, as Vrell’s
instructions were firmly embedded in his memory rather than in the thrall
itself. However, if the Prador at any time changed those instructions, or
checked the thrall linkages, it would soon realize it no longer controlled
him. Orbus wondered what would then happen. The thrall, once being rejected,
could not be reattached. Vrell would either core him fully, or else kill and
eat him. Not the most promising of choices.

He must escape, then, or die trying. He again glanced at these four members of
his crew. He would free them of their thralls, as perhaps, despite their
inclinations, they would realize what choices remained to them. Orbus reached
up, stuck a finger into the wound in his neck, hooked it around the thrall’s
body, and pulled hard. The thing came out like a huge splinter, its wriggling
legs coated with yellow pus. Reaching back to the tool chest, Orbus took out a
large clamp, closed it on the thrall, then dropped both clamp and thrall
underneath the engine casing. Had he destroyed it, Vrell might have been
alerted. Now, with the heavy clamp on it, the thing would not be able to crawl
away to alert the Prador. Drum had only got away with destroying his thrall
because he had been enslaved to it by voice, not through a direct radio
channel. Orbus then finished attaching the amplifier, before turning to
Drooble, as he reached over for something on a work surface extending from one
side of the tool chest. Orbus stabbed a finger into the opening wound at the
back of the man’s neck, and quickly hooked out his thrall.

‘Oh, oh the bastard,’ said Drooble.

‘Keep working,’ said Orbus, taking up another clamp.

Drooble gave him a wild look, the tip of his leech tongue questing around his
chin, but he found enough sanity to obey his Captain. Orbus then moved around
the engine casing, and positioned himself beside the next of his co-workers.

* * * *

Kladites packed the foremast stair leading up to the enclosed bridge, which
was also crowded. Including Ron and Forlam, there were five Hoopers here at
the controls, besides John Styx and Santen Marcollian. Erlin was standing back
against a wall, with Bones behind her, his bladed bony fingers at her throat.
Two Kladites stood either side of the Captain, their weapons trained on him
unwaveringly. A putrid smell permeated the air. Bloc, standing behind Aesop
with his back to the forward window, was obviously the source of the stench.

Something was obviously going seriously wrong with Bloc’s preservation
routines. Rather than resembling a dried-out mummy, he now bore the appearance
of a corpse that had lain rotting on a riverbed for some time. Some of his
grey skin had slewed aside from the back of one hand and also from his neck,
to reveal white flesh beneath. The transparent syntheskin on his skull had
bulged up like a damaged fingernail, and the grey morass underneath it was
veined with vivid yellow. His spectacle irrigator sprayed intermittently, and
both his eyes wept constantly. When he moved, looking from side to side as if
expecting attack at any moment, the exposed white flesh of his neck became
beaded with yellow pus.

Janer realized Bloc was long overdue for going into a tank, since the
Spatterjay virus, which in a living body fed upon dead tissue, was feeding on
his entire body—rotting it away.

‘Well, this is interesting,’ said Janer. ‘What are we doing here?’

Why had Bloc decided to do this?

‘You—over there.’ Bloc directed Janer to go and stand beside Erlin.

Janer did as instructed, turning to Erlin with, ‘What’s going on?’

Ron interjected bitterly, ‘Seems Bloc doesn’t want anyone trying to get to the
Prador ship to rescue the crew of the Vignette.’ The Captain ignored the two
Kladites covering him, though his angry gaze never strayed from Bones. ‘Now
why is that, do you reckon?’

Vignette? Janer quickly put together the facts just made available to him, and
came to the only conclusion possible: the Prador must have grabbed the crew,
so they were human blanks now, slaves. That then was one source of Ron’s
anger. He remembered their conversation outside the Baitman when they had
first encountered Wade. ‘Never underestimate how Old Captains feel about
that,’ Ron had said, referring back to thralldom and the Prador. The other
source of his anger was the threat to Erlin, who all Old Captains now looked
upon as something of an icon.

‘It is not your right to speculate,’ Bloc bubbled. ‘You will all remain here,
and everyone else must remain below decks.’

‘Ah,’ said Ron, ‘that’s to prevent anyone going over the rail to make that
rescue attempt.’ He finally now looked around.

‘That is correct,’ Bloc replied.

‘What’s your interest?’ asked Janer.

Bloc glanced at him. ‘You will all stay here,’ he repeated.

‘Why?’ demanded Ron. ‘I can understand you keeping some of us here, but what
about the rest of them?’ He pointed at John Styx, Santen Marcollian and the
Hooper crew. ‘This lot could cause you no more problems than those below
decks, and it is a bit crowded in here.’

Bloc froze as if this was too much input to process, then after a moment said,
‘Very well. You’—he pointed at Ron—‘will remain here along with Erlin and
Janer.’ He turned to John Styx. ‘You too will remain.’

‘Then I will stay too,’ said Santen Marcollian.

Styx looked at her. ‘Santen, please leave with the rest.’

Bloc seemed to have some trouble with this, since his eye irrigators were
drenching his face again. ‘You will both stay ... as hostages.’

‘There you go,’ remarked Ron, looking towards Forlam, who was now heading for
the door with some others. ‘So you lot remember, no one is to go over the side
and submerse.’ While Forlam looked back at him he added, ‘Anyway, there’ll be
no one to lead a rescue, what with that Polity drone, Thirteen, having been
destroyed by laser.’

Janer winced at this flagrant hint, but it seemed to have shot straight over
Bloc’s putrefying head. The four Hoopers and the reif filed out of the bridge
and headed below decks.

‘What now?’ Janer asked.

‘We wait,’ said Bloc. ‘We wait until it’s all over.’

* * * *

The sun was due to rise at any time now, and was turning the sky into a
rainbow maelstrom. Ambel thought about the battle they had witnessed the
previous evening. He had recognized the glare of particle beams cutting the
sky, laser flashes and the dull crump of explosions. But then it had all
suddenly ceased, and only minutes later gold-armoured Prador and spherical war
drones had been speeding overhead, to the sound of Captain Drum’s curses as he
waved his fist at the sky. Either Vrost had won the victory he sought, or for
some other reason the Prador captain had recalled its forces. Ambel, though,
now had more immediate concerns.

The island was visible; a dark mass poised between the psychedelic sky and its
reflection in the ocean. Within a few hours they would be hitting the beach,
and less than an hour after that, mayhem. He turned to Captain Drum, who now
stood beside him on the foredeck.

‘Maybe it won’t touch the Moby,’ he suggested.

‘Maybe it’ll tie a white flag to its tentacle and immediately surrender,’ Drum
replied.

He seemed a bit tetchy this morning, but Ambel felt this had less to do with
rowing all night bringing across his crew, weapons and supplies from the Moby,
and more to do with witnessing Prador up there in the sky, out of reach.

‘Anyway,’ Drum added, ‘you better hope it does attack my ship.’

Ambel glanced down at the two crews standing ready on deck. They were all
armed, and the harpoons from both ships were sharpened, their ropes attached.
Ambel just hoped they would be able to find something to which those ropes
could be tied. He harrumphed, raised his binoculars and gazed across at Drum’s
ship. The sail, Cloudskimmer, was doing an excellent job, controlling the
Moby’s fabric sails and steering the ship with his jaws clamped on the helm.
But inevitably the Moby was lagging behind.

‘How much are you paying him?’ Ambel asked.

‘Twice his normal fee, plus he wants an aug like the one you gave
Galegrabber.’ Drum gazed at Ambel estimatingly. ‘Supposing I can afford it.’

They had yet to settle who was to blame for all this. Whelkus titanicus had
started out pursuing Ambel, and Drum had opined that had he himself sailed
away, it would have left him alone. Ambel disputed this, adding that the
creature’s behaviour seemed very odd, and anyway it had not pursued him
through any fault of his own. Drum then decided it was Erlin who would shortly
be owing him a lot of Spatterjay New Skind.

Their pursuer surfaced occasionally, as if not wanting them to become
complacent about it. Earlier, when they had necessarily run slightly athwart
the wind and as a consequence slowed, it had drifted to one side, pulling away
from the Treader, which was closer, to go after the Moby instead. It might
have caught them otherwise. Ambel felt the whelk was enjoying the chase far
too much.

‘If there’s shallows way out,’ Ambel said loudly, ‘we’ll use both ship’s boats
to ferry everyone in. All the harpoons will have to take precedence in the
boats. Without them we’ll be running around this island till we all turn into
skinners.’

‘I doubt we’ll get everyone ashore before it attacks,’ murmured Drum.

‘Let’s hope for a steep beach,’ Ambel murmured back.

As they drew closer to the island, the sun gilded the underside of distant
cloud and now began washing colour from the sky. Meanwhile, the island’s
central volcanic cone became distinct above thick foliage. A great swathe of
peartrunk trees had been toppled, probably by the recent wave, but enough
still stood for Ambel’s purpose.

‘Keep us straight,’ Ambel told Boris, then bellowed, ‘Peck, get forward and
keep an eye out for shoals!’

His shotgun resting across his shoulder, Peck obeyed.

‘The rest of you,’ Ambel continued, ‘load the boats. We want to launch as soon
as we can, even if we can beach the ship.’

The crews began stowing harpoons and other items in the boats, which were hung
like upside-down beetles’ wings on davits either side of the ship. With Drum
following, Ambel climbed down to the lower deck, then headed forwards to peer
over the side. Even though the rising sun reflected off the water, he could
see the occasional shape passing below the ship, and undulating masses that
were the upper foliage of kelp trees.

‘We need to get right in, and quick,’ said Drum, pointing.

Ambel squinted in the direction indicated, noticing a mass of something
floating on the surface. At first he thought he was seeing sargassum, then
realized the mass was moving. Juvenile rhinoworms—the situation just got
better and better.

‘Starboard, two points!’ Peck abruptly yelled.

The ship turned slightly, and Ambel observed a twisted mass of packetworm
coral like some sunken temple sliding by to port. The ship shuddered as a
grating vibration came up through the deck.

‘Okay,’ Peck muttered, ‘three points.’

‘Let’s get that anchor chain up—we might be needing it,’ said Drum.

The two Captains moved up behind Peck and began hauling heavy anchor chain out
of the chain locker and coiling it on the deck.

Soon, over the side of the ship, the bottom became clearly visible. Ambel
estimated the depth to be four metres. Also visible down there were the pink
anguine shapes of more juvenile rhinoworms. Nothing else was evident, but then
anything else around here would have been eaten by now, no matter how solid
its shell.

‘I reckon we’ll be able to pull her in,’ stated Ambel.

‘We’ll need cover,’ said Drum.

Ambel nodded and turned to the crew. ‘Anne, Davy-bronte, and anyone with
Polity weapons, let’s have you up here!’

Anne stepped forwards screwing a new energy canister into her laser carbine,
then came Davy-bronte, brandishing his QC laser. Ambel was glad to see that
some of Drum’s crew also carried the necessary weapons: one pulse gun, a laser
carbine and a pulse rifle.

‘Okay,’ said the Captain, ‘the rest of you with old guns, divide yourselves
evenly between the two boats. That way you can cover us from either side if we
have to haul the ship in.’ Their various antiquated automatic weapons, rifles,
six-guns and shotguns would not prove very effective against worms swimming
under water, but were better than nothing.

When Ambel turned to face forward again, he observed Drum holding an
apple-sized silver device with a small touch-pad connected to one end. ‘I was
saving this to shove up a Prador where the sun don’t shine, but I guess I’ll
have to use it now.’

‘Don’t drop it too near the hull,’ Ambel advised.

Drum snorted.

Now the bottom was only a few metres down, and the beach close. Ambel heaved
up the anchor and moved beside Peck, gesturing him to stand back.

‘It’s reached her,’ said Drum.

Looking back, Ambel saw Cloudskimmer taking wing from the Moby, which was
canted to one side with its stern low in the water. A long white tentacle rose
high out of the sea, reaching higher than the masts, then smashed down
straight through the ship. Deck planking shot into the air and one mast began
to topple.

‘Fucking thing.’ Drum faced forward and hurled his grenade into the shallows
just before the beach. The Treader then began to shudder as its keel started
to bite into the bottom. Another crash from behind, and the two halves of the
Moby were sinking. A great fan of tentacles rose over it, a glittering
mountainous shell visible behind.

‘Get the boats in!’ bellowed Ambel.

Rope hissed through the davit pulleys, the two ship’s boats dropping to the
sea. Crew not standing with Ambel and Drum began scrambling over the side and
into them. From ahead there came a dull boom, followed by an explosion of
spume and fire and snakish corpses. The force of the blast rode the ship up
from the bottom for a moment, then it came down hard, shuddering to a halt and
flinging some of the remaining crew into the sea. Ambel had no time to watch
who might rescue those unfortunates.

‘Get your heads down!’ he bellowed, and, once his warning was heeded, began
swinging the heavy anchor round and round above him on a length of its chain.
He released it towards the beach and, towing out its chain with a rattling
roar, it splashed down only metres from the shoreline. Drum jumped over the
prow ahead of Ambel, who followed, submerging to his neck in the water, his
feet just touching the bottom. Up again, and he swam after the other Captain,
as pulse-gun and laser fire began hissing into the sea around him. On either
side the boats came in, their crews also firing at writhing shapes in the
water. When the water was only up to Ambel’s waist, a rhinoworm—nearly out of
adolescence, for it had dropped its forelegs—reared up beside him. He
backhanded it up out of the sea and sent it flying back five metres through
the air. Soon he joined Drum, who had lifted the anchor from the bottom. They
took firm hold of one tine each.

‘Well, here we go then,’ said Ambel.

He knew that Polity citizens witnessing this sort of strength might be
shocked, but for himself and Drum it was just something they accepted, as it
increased over the centuries. At one time even he and Drum would have
struggled to raise this anchor together, but now hauling on it to straighten
out a tonne of chain behind was no big deal to them—it had taken the best part
of a thousand years for them to become capable of this.

‘Let’s get her in, then,’ growled Drum.

They began trudging ashore, pulling the Treader in behind them. Once they
reached dry land, because of the combined weight being carried and the force
they were exerting, they waded up to their knees in the sand. Reaching the
head of the beach, they found an outcrop of volcanic stone, upon which they
took a stand to continue pulling the chain, hand-over-hand, until the ship’s
prow was out of the water.

‘Let’s move it!’ Ambel yelled, dropping the chain and gunshot-clapping his
hands.

The crew were swiftly unloading the boats, hauling harpoons and other supplies
up the beach. Nothing remained of the Moby but floating shards, and beyond the
Treader a mobile hill was rapidly heading shorewards.

* * * *

18

Turbul:
a billion years ago this creature was little different from any Terran fish.
It possessed a spine, the requisite internal organs, gills, fins, a tail and
teeth. However, the evolutionary pressure of being fed upon by leeches for so
long has wrought some strange changes. The turbul still possesses all of the
above, but now in a configuration enabling it to survive leech attack. Its
fins stem directly from the spine, the muscles moving them running inside its
bones. Muscles also run down inside the spine to the tail, and the jaw muscles
are similarly encased -just sufficient to keep it mobile and feeding. Its
other internal organs, contained in a bag attached to the spine itself, can
quickly regrow themselves. Outside all of this, with the fins protruding
through it, the turbul grows a dense cylinder of nutritious flesh, which is
nerveless and a prime target for leeches. A turbul can lose all of this flesh
and still survive. It is as if, rather than evolve a thicker skin or a shell,

the turbul has accepted
defences, and retreated
its outer layer to keep
to have done this, most

the inevitability of leech attack, abandoned its
inside with its most vital parts. It thus sacrifices
its inner self alive. There are many other fish forms
notably the boxy —

Forlam understood the oblique order he had been given by his Captain, also
that others might deliberately misinterpret it in the hope of avoiding danger.
Danger was not something that frightened him—only his own fascination with it
did that.

‘Go to your cabins; I’ll handle this,’ he said to the Hoopers accompanying
him. ‘I doubt more of us will be any help.’

‘But that’s where we’re going anyhow,’ said Dorleb.

Forlam sighed. It sometimes seemed to him that the fibres in the brains of
many Hoopers strangled their thought processes. ‘A laser won’t bring down a
Polity drone,’ he explained. ‘Captain Ron wants to free our mates below. He
ordered me to go ahead and rescue them.’

‘Huh?’ came Dorleb’s brilliant reply.

Now on the bridge stateroom deck, Forlam paused and looked around, then
abruptly bellowed, ‘Thirteen!’ The others eyed him in a way he had become
quite accustomed to. Let them think he was mad.

When they reached the door leading through to the crew cabins, one of the
Hoopers stepped through immediately, while shaking her head and saying, ‘Orbus
. . . the Vignette.’

Two more Hoopers followed her. The two remaining just stood watching Forlam.

‘You’ll be needing our help,’ said Dorleb.

‘No, I won’t,’ said Forlam. ‘More of us would just be easier to detect.’

Without further objection the last two headed off. Forlam soon reached the
head of the ladder leading down into the bilge, but rather than descend he
went into the nearby armoury. One crate remaining in the cage was still
sealed. He tore it open and took out a laser carbine, then continued on down,
finally reaching a walkway leading towards the submersible enclosure. He
paused by the door, gave it a light push with the snout of his carbine, and
watched it swing open. A floating shape was immediately visible, the moment he
stepped inside. Thirteen was hovering in the middle of the enclosure.

‘You’ve been expecting me,’ Forlam suggested.

‘I have not,’ the seahorse drone replied.

Ahead of the submersible, the irised door abruptly opened in the hull to
reveal a shimmer-shield and murky depths beyond. Movement to one side spun
Forlam round, raising his weapon, then he relaxed on seeing Isis Wade emerging
from the submersible.

‘What happened up in the bridge?’Wade asked.

‘Bloc sent away all those he didn’t consider a danger to whatever plans he
has. The Captain sort of ordered me here on a rescue mission.’

Wade smiled and pointed. ‘Suits and breather gear are over in those cabinets.’

Just like that.

Forlam felt a surge of something unpleasant in his guts. He walked over to the
glass-fronted cabinets and studied their contents. The suits were inset with
chain-mesh. The breather gear consisted of full-faced masks from which pipes
led to a haemolung that strapped on the wearer’s back. The cabinet locks were
coded touch panels, so he reached up to the top of the door before him and
wrenched it off.

‘I guess the designers of those cabinets didn’t take Hoopers into account,’
said Wade, stepping past Forlam. ‘Or Golem.’ He ripped off the next door and
took out a suit.

‘Why do you need a suit?’ Forlam asked, as he began donning one.

‘I can’t be hurt by much out there,’ Wade replied, ‘but I could lose much of
my syntheflesh.’

‘What’s the plan then?’ Forlam asked.

‘Thirteen can lead us to a place on the Prador ship’s hull where we can gain
access. We find the Vignette’s crew. If they’ve been fully cored we leave them
and get out fast. If they’re just controlled by spider thralls, we excise
their thralls and lead them out.’

‘Nice and simple then.’ Forlam reached down and drew a ceramal diver’s knife
from where it was sheathed at his calf. ‘What about the ship’s security
systems?’

‘Where we are going, the security system is weak, and Thirteen can disable it
undetected just so long as Vrell doesn’t run a diagnostic check.’

‘And if he does?’

‘Then we’re in trouble, and we may need our weapons.’ Wade reached for his
APW, which was resting against the door of the next cabinet.

Forlam eyed the footwear in the base of the cabinet, undecided on whether to
wear flippers or the weighted boots. When he saw Wade choose boots he did the
same. Soon they were ready and, hoisting a waterproof pack onto his shoulder,
Wade led the way towards the shimmer-shield, where Thirteen was already
pushing through into the ocean. On his turn, Forlam felt as if he was stepping
through a wall of treacle. Once through, and dropping the few metres down to
the Prador ship’s hull, he felt a sudden horrible excitement. Few Hoopers
learnt to swim, since no Hooper went into the sea as amatter of choice, fear
of it being inculcated from birth. Forlam looked around, almost disappointed
by the dead waters surrounding him. Then, clutching his carbine, he followed
Wade across the spaceship’s hull.

Thirteen led them out from the Sable Keech to the base of one of the weapons
turrets. All about drifted the remains of juvenile rhinoworms, prill and
glisters. This organic wreckage lay motionless, which for Spatterjay life
forms was unusual because, even in pieces, they usually kept moving. This mess
was, however, blurred around the edges and seemed to be dissolving. He
realized that though the battle had killed most large animals in the area, the
voracious plankton remained unaffected.

‘Here,’ came Thirteen’s voice from a com button in the corner of Forlam’s
mask. He noticed that the hull nearby was very uneven where it curved down to
the base of the weapons turret. Thirteen was poised over a metre-wide gap
between the edge of the turret and the hull. Joining the other two, Forlam
peered down into the dark cavity. The drone now descended, opening its
seahorse mouth to emit a beam of light. Forlam immediately jumped after it,
his boots dragging him down between narrow walls and landing him on a set of
guide rollers for the turret. The light was now playing down by his feet. He
stooped and peered into what might have been a crawl space for humans, so may
well have been intended for human blanks. He ducked inside as Wade descended
above him, more light spearing down from a torch the Golem held.

As he landed Wade said, ‘The light, on your carbine,’ and pointed with the
torch he himself held. Unfamiliar with all of the controls but the trigger,
Forlam groped about until Wade reached over and pressed a button on the stock.
Now his weapon emitted laser light at the lowest setting and maximum
diffusion.

‘Thanks,’ said Forlam, and wriggled after the drone.

Ten metres in, Thirteen tilted, manipulating something in the crawl-space
ceiling with its forked tail. A hatch hinged down and the drone ascended.
Forlam followed, standing up out of the water into a duct, then climbed up
over the edge of it. As Wade clambered up behind him Forlam took off his mask.
Somewhere he could hear fans operating, and a rank breeze blew in his face.

‘Ventilation duct,’ he decided.

‘Even Prador have to breathe,’ Wade observed, then turned to the hovering
drone. ‘Thirteen, your AG?’

‘There are no gravitic detectors inside this ship,’ the drone replied, moving
on.

Now, half-crouching, they made their way on through hundreds of metres of
ducts. Forlam realized that if he got separated from Thirteen and Wade he
might not find his way out again. Finally they came to a heavy metal grating
set in the floor.

‘The holding area,’ Thirteen announced. ‘Do not shine a light in there as it
will be detected.’

The drone descended tail first, turning slightly to fit through one of the
diamond-shaped holes in the grating. Once Thirteen was out of sight there came
a flickering of green light from below.

Lasers, Forlam realized.

Then, metallic clickings and scrapings ensued for a few minutes until Thirteen
called, ‘I have disabled the three cameras. They will show a previously
recorded scene until I instruct them otherwise.’

Wade now shone his torch down inside, revealing the scuttling of large lice.
Directing his own light into the area below, Forlam discerned Hoopers sprawled
on the floor. With a horrified thrill he realized that the lice were feeding
on them.

‘Where did you learn that trick?’ Wade asked the drone.

‘From an old Polity war drone who knows more about Prador security systems
than the Prador would be comfortable with,’ replied Thirteen.

Forlam grinned—he knew that old drone.

‘Your carbine,’ said Wade, holding out his hand.

Forlam handed it over, then shielded his eyes when the Golem knocked the
weapon’s setting back up and used it to cut their way in. It took some time;
the bars were thick even though out of the prisoners’ reach. When Wade had
sliced along three sides, he used the beam only to heat the metal on the
remaining side, before kicking the grating to bend it down.

‘How do we get them out of there?’ Forlam asked.

Wade opened his pack and took out an electric hoist and a webbing harness.

‘Right.’ Forlam snatched back his carbine and, jumping down into a mass of
lice, began stamping on them. Wade landed lightly beside him, stepped over to

the prostrate Hoopers, and began pulling off the lice still chewing on them.
Soon the horrible creatures got the idea and began scuttling for cover. Forlam
kicked one of the stragglers against the wall and leaned down to more closely
inspect a woman lying at his feet just as Wade adjusted the setting on his
torch so it became a lantern.

‘They’re gonna be trouble,’ Forlam observed.

The female’s clothing was ragged on her starveling dark-blue body; a leech
tongue protruded over the unnatural jut of her lower jaw. The man next to her,
he saw, had fingers twice as long as normal, had shed all his hair, and his
nose had melded with his top lip.

‘Evidently.’ Wade placed his light on a stony slab jutting from the nearby
wall. He then opened his pack and took out an injector—high dose Intertox.

Yeah, like that’s going to work, thought Forlam.

He remembered back to when he had approached this state, and some of the
things he had done at the time. He also recollected days spent in a reinforced
straitjacket, being similarly dosed until he ceased to be a danger ... to
everyone. He hung his carbine from his shoulder by its strap, then reached
down and turned the woman over onto her face. Drawing his ceramal knife he
wondered where to cut . . . Then something lashed out beside him, snatching
the knife from his hand.

‘We cannot do that,’ said Thirteen, now holding the knife in its forked tail.

‘What’s the problem?’ asked Wade.

‘I’ve been scanning,’ said the drone. ‘They have been converted into an
adjunct to the ship’s computer systems. If we remove their thralls now, Vrell
will realize at once.’

‘How strong is the signal?’ asked Wade.

Thirteen turned in mid-air to face the Golem. ‘I picked it up earlier on the
Sable Keech, but could not identify it then. Some sort of high-level
mathematical program is being run.’

‘Then presumably,’ Wade replied, ‘their location won’t be an issue?’

‘This is so,’ the drone replied.

‘We move them, then,’ said Wade, and turned away. ‘Forlam,’ he pointed to a
large mass of cable mesh hanging from the wall, ‘cut lengths of that. We’ll
bind them and take them out, one at a time.’

Forlam held out his hand to the drone, which returned his knife. Reluctantly
he resheathed it, then with a sigh unshouldered his carbine. He had been
looking forward to digging out those thralls, but really it would be best if
he did not derive his pleasures that way.

* * * *

As he worked, Vrell noticed the requirement for increased signal strength in
order to stay in contact with his blanks. Checking all other internal security
systems and encoded thrall channels, he immediately realized what was
happening. Two of the six in the holding area had been removed from the
spaceship and doubtless those who had done the removing were still aboard,
taking the others out, since there were many dead or suspicious areas in the
security camera network. But it did not matter all that much. The six were
still thralled, so he could continue to use their minds as processing space
whatever their location. Then he noticed that four who had earlier helped him
rework the U-space engine were free of their thralls, though trapped in the
engine room. But even that no longer mattered.

Obtaining the nanochanger had been easy. A simple instruction to Bloc, and the
reif had been forced to toss one over the sailing ship’s side. Setting it
working, however, had not been so simple. Vrell quickly realized that opening
or scanning the device would destroy or corrupt its delicate internal
components. In the end he instructed Bloc to next throw a reification
cleansing unit over the side. Now the changer was plugged into the cleansing
unit and working: injecting microscopic nanofactories into the fluid Vrell was
passing through the cleanser. This fluid was then circulated through a vessel
which took the place of a human body, and inside that the factories clung,
just as they would attach inside human veins: little volcanic limpets pumping
out masses of complex nanomachines. After hours of scanning these, Vrell
selected one variety of machine particularly suited to his purposes.

Now, before Vrell, in the laboratory he had recently opened, antigravity
containment suspended a mass of nanites cultured from his original selection,
in a saturated solution of salts within a study pit. Vrell peered down at the
watery lens-shaped mass. It was white but with a metallic hue, and shifted

slightly as the nanite clumps inside it readjusted. While operating the pit
through his control units, Vrell assessed a virtual representation of one of
the nanites in his mind. The nanite came with its own toolkit, which could be
programmed by radio. It was a supreme technological creation, and only by now
using the system of ship’s computers and human minds, earlier put together for
U-space calculations, could Vrell fully interpret it, and change it.

The original nanites, on activation, replicated a millionfold before searching
for bone. This they bored through in search of marrowbone stem cells. Their
purpose was then to deliver this base genetic template to the other
nano-builders throughout the human body. Stripped down to its skeleton, one of
these nanites formed a perfect framework to take other molecular tools.
However, its present tools could serve the Prador’s purpose: the catalytic
debonding molecule made to bore through bone could, with a small alteration,
be changed to bore through Prador shell—merely a bonus, as Vrell expected them
to gain access through the Prador lung. Those tools which enabled the nanite
to recognize marrowbone stem cells could be adjusted to detect genetic
sequences Vrell had obtained from the dead Prador in the drone cache.

The tools that then enabled the nanite to locate other builder nanites and
home in on them Vrell altered to locate certain potassium compounds found in
Prador nerve tissue, and other tissues in the Prador lung. Upon finding a
nerve, it then travelled along it until it hit a synapse, then it returned to
its replication stage digesting surrounding tissue to build copies of itself.
Finding lung tissue, it did the same. While dying, the victim would be
breathing more nanites into the air.

Once the virtual shape was performing to Vrell’s satisfaction, he loaded its
parameters to the pit, before turning his attention to the delivery system.
Some hours later he held a small wedge-shaped container that fitted perfectly
between the faces of one claw. Gaseous dispersion. A few nanites settling on
Prador shell or in the lung would be enough, for the right Prador.

With black amusement, Vrell well understood the King’s need to destroy any
Prador, outside his own family, potentially infected by the Spatterjay virus.
Such a creature would undoubtedly make a lethal enemy.

* * * *

Through omniscient senses from a commanding position Zephyr understood that
Death—the enemy—took many forms and realized that he must defeat every one of
them. The creatures that had died in the sea all around him were just the
result of a concentration of Death’s forces in this area; elsewhere in the
ocean that was going on all the time. But then creatures did not count as
life, so did their passing count as dying?

‘What about hornets?’ asked his other half, Isis Wade, from somewhere down
below.

Zephyr shook his head, but the question would not go away. He smacked his head
against the mast a couple of times, but that did not help either, only dented
the mast.

‘Individual hornets are insentient, yet the whole can be ourselves,’ Wade
persisted. ‘You cannot make arbitrary distinctions like that.’

‘Then they died,’ Zephyr replied out loud, ‘and I must do what I must do.’

‘You can’t fight Death, nor kill it. Death is an absence of life not the
presence of a tangible something.’

‘I have the means of striking a blow here.’ So saying, the Golem sail again
cracked his head against the mast.

‘Assume that everything you say is correct,’ said Wade. ‘Surely you see that
by killing you serve Death, even if it is Death itself you kill.’

Zephyr’s head felt strange now, and that had nothing to do with its recent
impact with the mast. The Golem sail looked up as shadows occluded the morning
sky and both Huff and Puff came in to land on nearby spars.

‘What’s that about striking blows?’ asked Puff.

‘I will strike a blow against Death, my enemy,’ Zephyr replied.

The two organic sails turned to look at each other. Huff shrugged, and Puff
turned back to Zephyr. ‘We’ve been hearing bits of your conversation with that
Wade fella when he climbs up here. Death is an enemy of us all, I suppose.’

‘Exactly,’ said Zephyr.

‘But it’s not a thing you can kill,’ Huff added. ‘Without it there would be no

life.’ Huff pointed down to the roof of the midship deck cabin.

Zephyr peered down and observed a pile of meat—juvenile rhinoworms the two
other sails had bitten into pieces.

Creatures . .. not alive . . . alive?

Zephyr felt a coil of angry buzzing inside himself. Hornets killed to find
food for the hive. Was that wrong then? If hornets did not feed, the hive
died, and so served Death. If hornets fed, then they killed, and again served
Death. By living, all creatures served Death

‘You know, somewhere in your heart,’ interjected Wade, ‘that your belief is
paradoxical.’

‘But it is my belief!’ Zephyr bellowed.

‘You what?’ asked Huff.

‘And thus we get to the heart of the issue,’ said Wade. ‘I’ll have to leave
you for a moment — the damned winch just jammed.’

Focusing on Huff, Zephyr shouted, ‘If I don’t believe I can kill Death, I will
not be me! I will be only part of something!’

‘You’ve lost me there,’ replied Huff.

* * * *

Extruding his silvery eye from a metre down in gritty mud, Sniper observed the
spaceship, now visible through the settling murk. It extended out of sight to
his right and left, and the side of it rose like a steel cliff before him.
Having got this close he wondered What next? If he could get inside, there was
no problem: what he would then do involved every missile left in his weapons
carousel. The problem was penetrating that armour.

Sniper listened to the sea-bottom sounds at the lower end of the aural
spectrum. Somewhere below him, the seismic activity of packetworms; a
kilometre back he heard the scuttling of prill and glisters returning to the
area, attracted by the organic detritus; and somewhere far to his left the
whooshing and snapping sounds of a turbul shoal already feeding. Also, from
somewhere above, there came rhythmic crumps as if someone were walking on the
spaceship’s upper hull. Now extruding one of his main spatula-ended tentacles,
he activated the scanning devices it contained, modifying the emitted
infrasound to mimic the other sounds around him. It took some minutes for him
to clean up the return signals, in which time he also detected ultrasound and
infrasound scans from the ship itself. In his mind he built up a fuller
picture of what lay before him, and felt a sudden surge of excitement, though
quickly curtailed.

It had to be a trap, he decided; there could be no other explanation. A major
triangular port lay open in the hull—the kind that Prador disembarked from, or
one for deploying large weapons. Sniper retracted his tentacle and eye, and
began burrowing towards that port.

The mud here was increasingly laden with rubble and large shell fragments, so
Sniper’s progress slowed. In two hours he finally reached the ship’s edge,
below the port, and again extruded his eye up through the mud. It was much
lighter than earlier, the sun well above the horizon and its light penetrating
into the depths. For a long moment he studied a strange life form nearby. This
segmented thing was long and wormish, and writhing slowly. One of its segments
had detached and was inching away, and even as he watched another broke free.
No record of this creature in his memory . . . but it was irrelevant. He again
probed his tentacle into the sea, and listened. Eventually he realized he was
detecting only echoes—signals of scans from the ship, bounced from ten metres
behind him, probably emitted from some device above him. That meant he rested
in a blind spot.

Has to be a trap, he told himself.

Sniper started his chameleonware generator, then slowly and carefully burrowed
to the surface. Halfway out from the sea bottom—no reaction. Fully out—still
nothing. Extending his tentacles ten metres up the ship’s side, he grabbed the
port’s lower rim and hauled himself up.

Drone cache.

He scanned inside with a strong ultrasound analogue of glisters and prill
fighting each other. No drones were evident, but he detected ten simple optic
cameras, nailed them with ten indigo lasers and projected into them the image
of what he had been seeing for the last few hours: mud. Still keeping the
cameras targeted, he eased inside the cache, not yet daring to use any drives
or AG. Now the complicated bit. Keeping the lasers on target, he groped around
on the floor, spooning up silt with the end of one of his major tentacles.

Closing its spatulate end around the mud, he injected the microscopic tubes he
had used to sample the Vignette wreck’s burnt timbers, but instead of
sampling, used them to draw off the water. The silt, strained to the
consistency of damp earth, he then injected with a slow-setting crash-foam
mix. He then moved around the cache jamming the mixture into nine camera
recesses. The tenth camera, still targeted by one laser beam, he decided he
must try to subvert, as he could not go around sticking mud on every lens
inside the ship.

It took him only minutes to remove this last camera from its recess and tap
into the optic feed behind it. Using techniques learnt longer ago than he
cared to remember and a programming worm stored from the same distant period,
he accessed an optic amplifier and recording module behind the wall. In the
module he found a clock and set it forward, then he linked recorded images
into the real-time feed. The camera would now show this cache as it had been
just before Sniper entered it.

Curious, the old drone copied to himself all the stored footage and, as he
reinserted the camera in the wall and moved back, began studying it. What he
saw was both fascinating and worrying. The life form outside had been in here,
but that was not the most fascinating thing he registered. Sniper turned and
gazed at a mound of remains lying to one side of the cache. He moved over and
scraped away some of the silt, picking up a large piece of charred Prador
carapace, then the remains of a claw. After delving for a little longer he
uncovered half of a distinct visual turret, a head—something no Prador he had
ever encountered had possessed. Abruptly his plans and intentions changed. He
might be somewhat irascible, but he still worked for the Polity, and that
organization might be served better by something other than the demolition job
he intended. Turning towards the inner lock, he began sorting through his
store of both physical tools and software for the right lock-picks.

* * * *

The entity within the submerged vessel opened communication with the other
Prador ship far above and asked, ‘Why do you want to kill me?’

On the bank of hexagonal screens beside it, the entity observed all the safety
programs come on as they restricted the communication to voice only, for Vrost
had just tried to send a worm burrowing into the spaceship’s systems. This
probing continued for a few minutes, until the Prador captain admitted defeat
and spoke.

‘Because you are an enemy of our King,’ Vrost replied.

‘Under my father, Ebulan, I have always been a loyal subject of Oboron. Now my
father is dead, why am I considered a threat?’

A long delay followed. This
could listen in. The entity
considered a threat without
called Vrell, had therefore
dying.

communication was open channel so that the Warden
knew Vrost could not openly say why Vrell might be
revealing what he himself was. The entity, itself
decided to have at least a little fun before

‘All Prador adults are a threat, and only a greater threat keeps them in
check,’ Vrost replied.

‘You mean Oboron, and his family, like yourself and the rest of the King’s
Guard?’

This was perhaps edging into dangerous territory, but this Vrell could not
resist.

‘It is by the rule of force and selection by power that the Kingdom survives.
No Prador can remain unaligned.’

Vrell reflected on how Prador families that grew too powerful or made too many
alliances were mercilessly crushed. In the Kingdom murder was a political
tool. He now understood certain events that had meant nothing to him in the
past: how many Prador families or individuals involved in biological research
had been exterminated. Obviously they too had stumbled upon what he now knew.

‘Let me align myself now. Let me swear loyalty to the King. You will then have
no reason to kill me.’

‘That seems reasonable,’ interjected the Warden on the same frequency.

Vrost rebuked the AI: ‘This is an internal Prador matter.’

‘Yes, but one that has spilled over into the Polity domain,’ the Warden
countered.

Vrost had to be foaming at the mandibles by now. On a nearby screen Vrell
observed an insistent signal from Vrost that they switch to a private channel.
Doubtless the Prador captain wanted a one-to-one chat, and also to actually

see Vrell—not because the bandwidth of a
be sent, but to confirm the truth of its
That was not going to happen. And anyway
this Vrell—who decided to play this game
concession he had to make.

visual signal would allow a worm to
suppositions one way or the other.
Vrost would learn nothing by seeing
for a little longer before making the

‘There would have been no problem, Warden, if Vrost had not arrived here
intent on causing an incident with the Polity, and an ecological disaster down
here.’

‘This is true,’ the Warden replied. ‘You too could have avoided an incident
had you declared yourself to me. Under Polity law you are not culpable for
anything you did whilst under the control of Ebulan’s pheromones. Now,
unfortunately, you have kidnapped some of the people of this planet, and
killed one of them, and also endangered the lives of Polity citizens.’

Vrell felt a moment’s chagrin at that. It had not even occurred to him that
the Polity would not automatically want to hunt him down and kill one of
Ebulan’s kin.

‘I admit to endangering Polity citizens, but only so I could survive. Those
citizens would have been in no danger were it not for Vrost’s intemperate
actions. I also admit to kidnapping citizens of this planet. The unfortunate
death of one of them was due to a radiological accident aboard this ship. I
will, however, release the others unharmed, should I be given the
opportunity.’

Vrell knew that the blanks could recover from the changes they had undergone,
but that to call them ‘unharmed’ was rather stretching the terminology. The
lie about a radiological accident could be proven neither one way nor the
other, but none of that really mattered. All that was needed was Vrost’s
belief in what was to follow.

‘What then will be your actions?’ asked Vrost.

‘Obviously this situation cannot continue. Should you destroy me down here,
that will result in diplomatic repercussions with the Polity, but I cannot
remain down here forever.’

‘This is so.’

‘As I see it, I must prove my loyalty to the King. Allow me to leave this

world and I will surrender myself to you. I will place this ship in a parking
orbit, and come over to you in a suit only.’

More long minutes passed, then Vrost replied, ‘That is acceptable.’

Vrell accessed the ship’s systems and began to follow instructions.

Prador never showed mercy and never backed down. This Vrell knew that Vrost
would allow him no closer than a hundred kilometres. He was going to die, and
he was seriously annoyed about that.

* * * *

Water, carried through the shimmer-shield in the folds of Forlam’s suit,
splashed onto the floor. He pulled off his mask, walked over to the
submersible and shed his other load at the foot of it. Over many years he had
incidentally met most of the Vignette’s permanent crew, and in latter years,
before he went offworld with Ron, engineered encounters with them because he
felt they well knew something he was only just beginning to learn. He did not
recognize this crewman’s features, but then they were no longer quite human.
This one was a man and, judging by his clothing and the facial jewellery that
seemed to be getting gradually sucked into his face, he was one of two Forlam
had met earlier. The other might be one of the other two lying here. He turned
round as a splashing sound alerted him to Wade stepping in through the
shimmer-shield.

Wade trudged over and dumped the fourth crewman on the floor. He paused then
tilted his head as if listening to something.

‘Two more and we’re out of there,’ said the Golem, now focusing on his
companion.

They could easily have carried more than two each—Wade being a Golem and
Forlam being a middling old Hooper—but the difficulty lay in getting them
through the ventilation ducts.

‘There’s still Orbus and the other three,’ Forlam reminded him.

‘I know, but Thirteen is having enough trouble with the security systems we
have encountered. He says our chances of getting them out of the engine room

are remote.’

Forlam contemplated that as they headed back towards die shield. He owed Orbus
nothing, just as he owed these here nothing, and to endanger himself
attempting to rescue the remaining four was near insane in its foolishness. If
Wade was not up to it, he wondered if he could rely on Thirteen’s continued
help.

Again donning his mask, Forlam followed Wade back out into the ocean. Wade was
just ahead of him, but rather than move on to the entrance beside the weapons
turret, he turned to press a hand against Forlam’s chest.

‘Be still,’ he instructed over com.

Forlam froze and watched a turbul shoal pass overhead. The urge to pull away
from Wade and start jumping up and down was almost unbearable, but he managed
to repress it. Abruptly he realized that the changes wrought in him over the
years—which had been exacerbated by his problems on the Skinner’s Island, when
he had ended up looking something like those back inside—were going to kill
him. But that was just an intellectual assessment: the prospect of danger and
of death aroused in him a weird excitement.

‘Come on,’ said Wade, once the turbul were out of sight.

This time Forlam easily remembered the route through the ship. They dropped
into the holding area where Thirteen, his AG shut off, clung to a wall ledge,
then they stepped over to the last two of these crewmen.

‘We have to hurry,’ Wade said. ‘I need to get back.’

‘Why?’ asked Forlam, dragging one of the two Hoopers over to the winch hook.

‘It’s complicated,’ said Wade.

‘What isn’t?’

‘Okay, I am presently in constant communication with someone above, trying to
persuade that individual not to leave the Sable Keech. He’s chewing on a spar

at the moment, and I don’t think the threat of the weapons on this ship’—Wade
waved a hand about himself—‘will restrain him much longer.’

‘You’re talking about Zephyr.’

Wade looked at him oddly, then started the winch running with the remote
control he held. Forlam grabbed the hook, over which he had slipped the cables
binding the Vignette crewman’s wrists, and rode the winch up with him. Up
above he unhooked the man and dragged him to one side, then rode the winch
down

‘What makes you say that?’ the Golem asked.

‘Oh come on, we’ve all seen you climbing up that mast for your daily chat. I
don’t see why you do that though, if you can communicate with Zephyr from
anywhere.’

They hooked up the second man, and this time Wade rode up with him, and stayed
up there to lower the hook back down for Forlam.

‘Talking to him face to face, he cannot shut down communication, except by
shoving me off a spar,’ Wade explained.

‘What’s it all about?’ Forlam asked, reluctant to reach up and grip the hook.

‘Come on, we have to—’

Suddenly the Prador ship was vibrating. Thirteen shot away from the ledge to
hover in the middle of the room, turning slowly, his tail lashing like an
angry cat’s.

‘What is that?’ Forlam asked.

‘Turbines,’ said the drone briefly.

‘Come on!’ shouted Wade.

Forlam addressed the drone. ‘Can you open that door into here?’

‘I can, but the ship’s sensors would pick up anyone who moved beyond it.’

‘Forlam, don’t do this,’ said the Golem.

From an earlier exchange, Forlam had learnt the location of the engine room: a
hundred metres back down the main corridor then off to the left. If he was
quick, he might be able to get it done before Vrell had time to react.

‘Can you get those two out by yourself?’ he asked Wade.

‘I can’t help you,’ the Golem warned. ‘What I have to do is too important.’

‘Thirteen, open the door, would you.’ As the drone drifted across the holding
area, Forlam picked up his laser carbine and drew his ceramal knife from his
boot.

* * * *

The juvenile rhinoworms who had been sporting in the shallows, and
occasionally venturing ashore until Ambel kicked them back, disappeared like
fog in a gale. The giant whelk arose out of deeper water, and Ambel realized
that seeing it out at sea, or attached to a leaping heirodont, gave no true
impression of its scale. The creature was truly gigantic, and he began to feel
some reservations about his plan. But there was nothing he could do about that
now. He pulled back the twin hammers of his blunderbuss, brought the weapon up
to his shoulder, and aimed at its eyes.

Coming athwart the Treader, it paused, one eye on the ship and one eye
swinging towards him. It then snatched one of its huge white tentacles up out
of the ocean and swept it across, tearing away the rear mast as easily as
brushing cobwebs, then flicked the tangle of mast spar and rigging into the
sea.

‘Oh you bugger!’ said Ambel, and pulled the trigger.

His gun boomed, kicking out a cloud of smoke, and its load of stones pocked
the creature’s lower body around one eye. It blinked, reached back with a
smaller tentacle to rub at the base of that eye-stalk, then abruptly surged
towards Ambel. The Captain turned and ran back into the forest of peartrunk
trees. Behind him the whelk ploughed up the sand. He heard a sound as of some
massive cork pulling out of a bottle, and glanced back to see a whole tree
uprooted, then crashing down by the tideline. This did not bode well for the
plan either. Finally he reached the spot he had designated and turned to face
the monster.

The whelk’s shell stood as high as the highest branches and, while scraping
by, knocked showers of leeches down from them. He noticed how its stalked eyes
now extended out sideways from its main mass as if triangulating on him. Its
flesh skirt spread for many metres ahead of it, and extending from that its
main two tentacles were nearly in reach of Ambel. Yet it hesitated.

‘Come on! What are you waiting for!’ the Captain bellowed.

The monster began to ease forward again, and Ambel began to move back. Then
Drum stepped into view from the right, hefting a leech harpoon. He let out a
growling shout and hurled the weapon, hard. The point of it struck the whelk’s
main body, but only penetrated deep enough for the barbs to engage. Behind
Drum, Roach took up the rope and hauled it taut, while behind him two juniors
wrapped the end of it twice around a peartrunk tree. The creature slapped its
tentacle down, aiming for Drum, but clipped the rope instead. With a wrenching
sound the tree tilted, and one of the juniors still clutching the rope was
jerked hard against the trunk. He bounced once and landed limply on the
ground.

‘Over here!’ shouted Anne from the other side and, firing her carbine, began
to cut smoking lines across the monster’s flesh. It swung towards her, further
loosening the tree. Another crewman ran forward eagerly, swinging his machete
at a nearby tentacle. The blade just bounced off it, and while the man stared
with puzzlement at his weapon, the same tentacle shot up and hit him with a
sound like a sledgehammer hitting a peach. He left the ground and disappeared
into foliage, five metres up.

‘Ready, lads,’ said Ambel, taking up the harpoon at his feet. Pacing forwards,
he threw this second weapon with all his might. It struck a soft spot just
below shell, and penetrated deep. Behind the Captain, Silister and Davy-bronte
took up the harpoon rope and wrapped it around a rocky outcrop. Ambel began
running to the left, spying Drum heading to the right. The other Captain
snatched up another harpoon.

‘We need to get in closer!’ Ambel shouted to him. ‘We can’t afford to have any
of these come loose!’

On the other side of the creature from Drum, Boris carted his dismounted deck
cannon out of cover. As he fired it, the recoil flung him over onto his back.
Striking the whelk’s shell, its projectiles exploded glittering shards all
over Drum, who was now charging in with his harpoon held level. Peck, pumping
cartridge after cartridge into his shotgun, covered Boris as he struggled to
his feet and recovered the cannon. Drum struck, driving the harpoon half a
metre in below the whelk’s eye, then with a bellow and another massive shove,
thrust it in a full metre. The whelk’s bubbling squeal was painful to hear.

Another harpoon from Ambel, this time straight through the end of a major
tentacle. A group of five hauling on the rope, trying to draw the limb down
and immobilize it. Someone screaming on the other side, the ragged remains of
a human thumping down onto the earth. Yet another harpoon from Drum, but
snapped off before its rope could be secured. A peartrunk tree, ripped out of
the ground, slammed down on two fleeing Hoopers. More harpoons. More ropes.
Someone suspended high, crunched up like paper, discarded. Another Hooper
dragged in to disappear underneath the fleshy skirt. Now came Ambel’s tenth
harpoon. He ran in while crew opposite him fired on the creature, again
distracting it. He swore when one badly aimed shot thumped into his stomach,
then drove the harpoon down hard into the base of a large tentacle, rested his
full weight on it, and shoved again. The weapon went right through into the
ground.

Ambel looked up to see one dinner-plate eye observing him from only a metre
away, just as the tentacle twisted, smacking the harpoon haft hard against his
shoulder. He felt his collarbone break, staggered back, then turned to run. He
caught sight of Crewman Pillow struggling to tie off this latest rope, then a
tentacle wrapped around Ambel’s waist, jerked him to a halt, and lifted him
off the ground.

The whelk now reared, exposing its serrated beak and, on the ground below,
what was left of a crewman it had grabbed earlier. The Hoopers kept firing on
it from all sides as it drew Ambel in, champing that beak in anticipation.
Some shots penetrated, most just bounced off. Black lines crisscrossed the
tentacle holding Ambel, along with the glowing pockmarks of pulse-gun fire.
Drum charged forwards with another harpoon, aiming for the same limb. He
hurled it just as another tentacle swept his feet from under him, missed his
target, but the harpoon struck and penetrated shell. Ambel heard a hissing,
and smelt something rank.

‘Fire at the shell!’ he shouted. ‘Fire at the shell!’

Anne was the first to transfer her aim, perhaps realizing Ambel’s intent. And
that was all it took, as her shots ignited the methane now hissing from the
shell. There came a drawn-out roaring explosion, the shell splitting to spew
out a sheet of flame that ignited the surrounding foliage. As the whelk
screamed, Ambel found himself hurtling through the air above.

‘Oh shit and buggeration,’ he managed, before coiling himself into a ball as
he crashed back down.

It was some hours later that Silister and Davy-bronte found him, and helped
him back to join the others. He stood and observed the whelk, its shell still
smoking, pinned tight by thirty harpoons securely roped down. One of its eyes
was missing. The other blinked at him.

‘Gulliver,’ he muttered, pointing a shaky finger, but later found that his
fellow Lilliputians had not done too well. Two of them were dead—sprine was
administered to them because their head injuries were so bad that little
remained inside their skulls. Seven others would be severely immobilized until
their backbones healed; one was missing his legs, which were somewhere inside
the whelk; and not one of them had come through this without broken bones.

‘It could have been worse,’ he said, finally.

He understood why Drum nearly ruptured himself with laughter.

* * * *

19

Boxy:
this fishlike creature obtains its name from the cubic shape of its body. Like
the turbul, the boxy carries a sacrificial outer layer of flesh but, due to
its odd shape, is unlike the turbul in being slow-moving. That boxies manage
to survive and prosper was originally put down to their breeding rate: after
mating, one fully fleshed female will convert all her outer flesh into upwards
often thousand eggs, and she can do this as often as eight times a year. The
true reason for their flourishing remained misunderstood until their behaviour
was studied by the Polity Warden’s submind drones. Boxies habitually swim
together in large shoals, and when an attack by leeches is unavoidable, they
clump together to neatly form a large cubic mass. Those carrying the least
outer flesh congregate towards the centre. Should an attack continue, this
basic mass will rearrange, continuously positioning the more fleshy boxies to
the outside. This is classic herd-like behaviour — putting the more vulnerable
individuals to the centre. Some types of whelk have also evolved similar
herding behaviour, specifically the frog whelk—

Bloc knew he could not hold it together for much longer. New error messages
kept flashing up in his visual cortex every few minutes, and if he did not get
himself into a tank soon, he would end up like Bones and have no body to
resurrect. Also, since it was becoming evident that the Prador ship might soon
be on the move, things were getting a bit tense here on the bridge.

‘If it comes straight up, we’re buggered,’ announced Captain Ron. ‘Let’s start
the engines so, if we get a chance, we can pull clear.’

Bloc stared down at his right hand, which was gripping his carbine. It was
shaking, and that could not be due to the putrefaction of his body but to some
deeper fault. He must not let anyone off this ship—that fact was hard-wired
into his mind, had become his main purpose for being—but enforcing that order
was now destroying his chance at resurrection. The longer he remained here in
control, the more of his body would be eaten away. But once placed in a tank
he would no longer be in control, and then would they even keep him there,
after all he had done? He must remain totally in control to prevent anyone
leaving the ship, but he . . . but . . . but. . . His thoughts spun round and
round in circles, and for a moment he could not even find the will to speak.

‘Bloc, let us start the engines,’ Ron repeated.

‘You will remain . . .’ was all Bloc could manage.

‘We’ll all end up in the sea,’ muttered Aesop.

Bloc immediately clamped down on him hard, but the effort of doing so resulted
in displacement of the mess of software in his head, and he was mentally
blinded by the mass of error messages scrolling up in his mind. As soon as he
managed to turn them off, another flashed up:

MEMSPACE: 00018

He cleared that, and when he could finally see again, he found John Styx
standing before him.

‘Look.’ Styx pointed outside.

Bloc turned his head to see one of the towering weapons turrets sinking. It
was slowly being withdrawn into the Prador ship.

‘It’s preparing to leave,’ explained Styx, ‘and if it destroys our ship in the
process, what then? All of us end up at the bottom of the sea, no Kladites to
adore you, no power for you to exercise, no triumphant arrival at the Little
Flint—your dream of the Sable Keech ended.’

Bloc felt a flash of anger. They were disrespecting him again, ignoring what
he was and all he had done for them. He said to Styx, ‘You . . . know too
much.’

‘What’s to know? That you’ve deified a man who would have nothing but contempt
for you. You crave worship as much as you crave control. Let us at least try
to move the ship to safety.’

‘Keech . . . would understand.’ Wouldn’t he? Everything was too confusing now.

Styx stepped forwards. ‘You said I know too much. Would you like to know how?
I know so much because I’ve known about you for a lot of years, Taylor Bloc. I
knew all about the corruption and murder you instituted while you were alive,
and how you used Cult power to obtain the industrial contracts that first made
you rich.’

‘Enough,’ said Bloc, still trying to find some control in his own mind.

Styx continued relentlessly, ‘I knew about your interest in Prador technology,
for my interest was the same if not more than yours. I should have dealt with
you back then, but I had more pressing concerns, and anyway I’d learnt that
certain groups on Klader were sending friends Aesop and Bones after you, so
thought that would be the last I’d hear of you. It wasn’t until recently I
learnt how you had been reified and were apparently served by two individuals
called Aesop and Bones. Imagine my surprise. Imagine how little time it took
me to figure out what you had done.’

‘I said . . . enough . . .’

‘You know,’ said Styx, ‘I actually thought about a change of career. But while
there are shits like you running around, I’ve still got a job to do.’

MEMSPACE: 00007

‘Of course I should have arrested you before you got this far, as here we are
beyond Polity law, but it’s surprising the power you have to fascinate. I
should have acted. I should not have allowed you to establish power over the
reifications on this ship.’ He pulled from his jacket an aerosol canister of a
kind Bloc immediately recognized, and held it up. ‘I should not have allowed
this.’

In a puzzled voice, Ron asked, ‘What’s that, then?’

Erlin, still restrained by Bones, replied, ‘It’s a hormone from a creature
that grazes on fungus, and has a smell almost irresistible to hooders.’

Ron shrugged, then stepped over to one of the consoles.

‘Stay were you are!’ Bloc shrilled.

‘I think we’ve had enough of this,’ said Ron. With casual speed he reached out
with his hands, grabbed both his Kladite guards and slammed them together so
hard that their balm spattered the surrounding consoles. They stayed upright
for a moment, then began to sag. Ron ignored them, pressing a button and
stooping over the intercom microphone. ‘Okay, Hoopers, time to come out and
play. Take down these Kladite buggers.’

‘Kill him!’ Bloc screamed.

Ignoring the weapon in his own hands, Bloc sent an instruction to Aesop, who
raised his carbine and fired it at Ron. The beam sliced into the Old Captain’s
arm, but briefly, for Janer was there in an instant, driving a thrust kick
into Aesop’s chest and slamming him back over a console and straight into one
of the windows.

‘That smarts.’ Ron merely patted out his smoking limb, but when the two
Kladites at the head of the stairwell started firing, he roared and charged
straight across the bridge. Ignoring the holes being burnt into his body, he
grabbed the two of them and slammed them together, before throwing them down
amidst those trying to cram up the stairwell. Ramming the door shut on them,
he spun the wheel and smashed his fist into the door’s coded locking
mechanism. By now the three remaining Kladites inside the bridge had also

opened up on him. He ran at them, caught them, and one after the other tossed
them out the gap where a window had been knocked out by the tsunami. They were
nothing to him, the burns they inflicted were nothing to him. For the first
time Bloc had some true intimation of what it meant to be an Old Captain.

Ron now headed over to another console and pressed a sequence of touch-plates.
A new vibration thrilled through the ship as its engines started.

‘Stop ... or I kill her!’ Bloc shouted, then shook his head, blinded again by
error messages. He staggered back, waved his arm in front of himself. Chaotic
vision returned. Through Aesop’s eyes—Janer was pinning that reif to the
floor—he saw himself waving his arm with rotten skin hanging off it in a
sheet. He whimpered, fought for control, regained full vision.

‘Stop the ship or I kill Erlin!’ Bloc shouted.

‘You forget,’ said Erlin, ‘I’m a Hooper.’ She reached back, grabbed Bones and
ducked down, throwing him. He landed near Ron and shot upright again. Ron
backhanded him with such force he flew in a flat trajectory out of the window,
after the Kladites. Erlin stood clutching a hand to her bloody throat. She
spat some blood and grinned, exposing gory teeth.

The ship seemed to be tilting, then Bloc realized that no, it was turning. The
Prador spaceship must have dropped down to pass under it, for to his left one
of the low turrets was generating its own wake. What could he do now? The
Prador had abandoned him, and now a void was opening in his consciousness. His
attention swinging to Santen and Styx, he raised his carbine and fired. Santen
stepped quickly in front of Styx, and staggered back gazing down at her
burning chest, then up at Styx who had caught her.

‘You think ... I didn’t guess,’ she said to him, smoke issuing from her mouth.

MEMSPACE: 00005

Styx lowered her to the floor, her hardware obviously damaged for she showed
no further signs of moving. Bloc swung his carbine from right to left, trying
to cover everyone remaining in the bridge.

‘All your dreams, Bloc’ Styx shook his head as he stood. ‘I think, before you
shoot me and Ron subsequently rips your head off, I’d like to tell you more
about myself and my investigations.’

‘What’s ... to know?’ asked Bloc dismissively.

‘Well, I’m a policeman,’ said Styx.

‘So? There is no law out here.’

‘Yes.’ Styx carefully held up his left hand and pulled back the sleeve to
expose an antique watch. So as not to get anyone too excited he slowly reached
out, pressed buttons on the side of it to change the display, then pressed his
thumb against that display.

What now?

Travelling out from either side of the wristband, a fizzing light spread like
embers on fuse paper, across John Styx’s shrivelled skin. Behind this fire,
his skin seemed to inflate, till it adopted the normal healthy texture of a
living human being’s. Though Bloc recognized some very sophisticated
chameleonware effect, he could not understand the why of it.

The
his
all
his

light fizzed to the tips of Styx’s fingers and
arm and into his sleeve, lighting his clothing
the way around his body. Eventually it reached
neck and over his face, revealing living human

went out. It travelled up
from inside as it spread
his collar, travelled up
features.

Something familiar . . .

Bloc tried to dismiss the thought. Everyone knew that the longer you lived,
the more readily your brain catalogued people by type, till everyone began to
look familiar. Then it hit him so hard, the realization of who now faced him,
that he lost his last shreds of control. He sank down on his knees.

‘Well bugger me,’ said Ron.’ That policeman.’

The man stepped calmly forward, tugged the laser carbine from Bloc’s limp
grasp and turned the weapon to shove it against his chest. The carbine was
pointed slightly to one side, precisely at where Bloc’s crystal was located.
It was all too much.

OUTPARAFUNCT: B.P. LOAD INC. 100%

WARN: EXTREMITY PROBES NIL BALM LA71-94, LH 34-67 . ..

WARN: ALL E-PROBES REG. VIRAL INFECT.

MEMSPACE: 00002

One after another, warning messages were now scrolling up before his inner
vision and he seemed unable to shut them down. The next thing Bloc knew he was
flat on his back staring through a flood of artificial tears at the roof of
the bridge.

‘How does it feel to have a ship named after you?’ asked Captain Ron.

‘Well, I’m honoured of course,’ replied the man standing over Bloc.

MEMSPACE: 00000

OVERLOAD: CRYSTAL SAFETY MODE

Blackness.

* * * *

The retracting weapons turret was closing the gap. Ignoring what injuries he
might cause the two crewmen, Wade shoved them up through it then followed
them. The spaceship was moving lower in the sea now, the blast of its turbines
stirring up a great wall of silt specked with glittering shoals of boxies,
whose cubic bodies seeming like pixel faults in a solid holographic display.
The Sable Keech was now a few metres up, sliding over, driven by its own
screws. The submersible port had to be some distance ahead of him, and there
was no way he could swim to it encumbered with his present load. His APW
strapped across his back, he quickly tore off his gloves, boots, then the
syntheflesh coverings of his hands and feet revealing his skeletal metal
fingers and toes. In his left hand he grabbed the cables binding the wrists of

the two crewmen, squatted, then drove himself upwards off the Prador ship. Two
metres up and the keel of the Sable Keech was speeding immediately over him.
He closed his free hand on the keel’s edge, sliding and tearing up splinters,
drove his fingers in, then brought up his feet and drove in his toes. The
current’s drag threatened to dislodge him, until he released the crewmen,
quickly stabbed his hand underneath the cable binding their wrists and slid it
along his arm till the pair were dangling from its crook, then took a grip of
the keel with his other hand. Now to climb.

Pulling free his right hand he reached up and drove it into the woodwork
again, then one foot, then the other hand, the other foot. With painful
slowness he began working his way out from the keel, across an upcurving
ceiling of planking the size of a sports field. The two crewmen rode back
along his arm until they were hanging from around his shoulder. Boxies zipped
past as the ship accelerated, then a passing turbul closed its jaws on one
crewman’s foot and Wade had to drive his fingers deeper into timber to prevent
himself being dragged from the hull. The creature finally separated from its
prey, though it took the foot with it.

Wade could have moved very much faster without his burden, but even though
needing to get aboard the ship with some urgency, he stubbornly held onto the
two rescued Hoopers.

Zephyr, wait for me. There’s something more you need to know.

It was a lie, but might be enough to delay the Golem sail, even though the
threat of weapons fire from the Prador ship was growing less.

I have seen enough, said Zephyr. Life is at constant warwith Death, and I will
strike a blow in that campaign . . . It is none of your concern.

Wade realized, by that last comment, that Zephyr was also conducting a
conversation with the two living sails. Perhaps they would delay the Golem
sail. Now reaching the steeper curve up to the side of the ship, Wade observed
white water above him. Not far to go now. Then things began bumping against
him in the water: reddish-brown, swan-necked, with long flat bodies.

Oh, you have got to be kidding.

One of the leeches attached to his exposed ankle and, with an electric
screwdriver sound, reamed out a chunk of his syntheflesh. The predator then
fell away, writhing like a blood worm, and spat out the unsavoury mouthful.
Others attached to the two crewmen, taking out chunks of them too, but unable
to enjoy seconds as the current swept them away. Wade concentrated on the task

in hand—talking to Zephyr just slowed him down. If he did not get the pair of
them out of the water soon, he would be rescuing nothing more than what the
Hoopers called stripped-fish.

Finally reaching the surface he began hauling himself up the sheer face of the
hull. Twenty metres up he passed one of the square windows, from which a
female reification observed him, perhaps with bemusement—there was no way to
tell. He saw her turn away and begin punching touch-plates on her computer’s
console. Meanwhile, to his right the remains of a laser turret projecting from
the hull kept turning towards him, spraying sparks as if in frustration.
Finally, fifteen metres from the rail, a face peered down at him. There came a
bellowed ‘Over here!’ and shortly after a rope uncoiled down to him. Once he
grabbed it, he and his load were hauled rapidly up the side. His supposition
that some kind of winch was in use was proved wrong on discovering Captain Ron
at the other end of the rope.

‘That the lot of them?’ The Captain eyed the two figures now lying prostrate
on the deck.

‘Four more down in our submersible enclosure,’ Wade informed him.

‘Forlam?’

‘Still aboard the Prador ship, trying to free Orbus and three others.’

Ron winced.

* * * *

‘So how you gonna kill Death, then?’ asked Huff.

‘I told you . . . none of your concern.’

Zephyr swayed from side to side on the spar, glancing first over to where the
Prador ship was surfacing half a kilometre away, then peering down at figures
on the deck below. He had to leave soon. It had been a mistake his coming here
to learn more about the enemy. What he had seen here only confused the issue,
when in the beginning it had been so clear . . .

‘Death will end,’ said Zephyr firmly.

‘But how?’ Puff asked.

Before Zephyr could formulate a reply, Huff interjected, ‘If nothing dies
we’ll be sitting neck-deep in leeches and prill, all eating each other and
being eaten.’ Huff shook his crocodilian head. ‘Though admittedly things are
not far off that around here.’

Zephyr observed Puff bow forward to catch Huff’s eye, raise a spiderclaw up to
the side of her head to scribe a little circle, then shake her muzzle. Zephyr
did not recognize what this meant until digging deep into his database.

‘I am not mad!’ he yelled.

‘Okay,’ said Puff. ‘Tell us exactly how you’re gonna “strike a blow in this
campaign”. Or are your claims all piss and wind?’

Zephyr suddenly understood. Here he had encountered nothing but killers and
the dying, because they were all the same. He had encountered nothing but
argument for the same reason: they all served Death. That entity had put them
here in his path to prevent him doing what he must do.

‘I will kill sprine,’ announced the Golem sail.

‘What? You can’t do that,’ said Huff. ‘How are you gonna do that?’

‘You won’t stop me, and you won’t change my mind.’ Zephyr began to spread his
wings.

‘Wait.’ Huff reached out with his own wing, a few of his spiderclaws grabbing
some of Zephyr’s wing bones. ‘You haven’t explained—’

In any war there are casualties—this is unavoidable. Zephyr focused on Huff,
his particle cannon coming online easy as blinking. The flash and the
subsequent screech negated everything else, and what remained of Huff fell
like a smoking comet.

‘Huff! HUFF!’

Puff surged forwards, her jaws open wide, with a snarl beginning deep within
her. Another flash, then more long-boned organic wreckage falling to the deck
below.

Wings booming open, Zephyr launched himself from the mast. You won’t stop me,
he thought, but was unable to articulate more than a scream.

Isis Wade’s words followed him into the sky: ‘What have you done?’

* * * *

The corridor loomed as wide as a hangar and dank as a cave. Stepping out into
it, Forlam immediately broke into a run. He glanced back to see Thirteen
bobbing behind him, with a flicker of intense lasers all around as the drone
attempted to flash out all the cameras around them. This time the drone
certainly had no time to subvert them.

Foolish drone, thought Forlam. It should have fled while it had the chance. It
could not know how little Forlam cared for his own life just at that moment.

Lice were now scuttling across the floor, probably shaken loose by the
vibration of the ship’s turbines. Leaping a pile of human bones, Forlam
quickly came to the end of the corridor, blocked by huge sloped gratings. To
his left was the door he sought. It was split diagonally and partially open.
There came a hammering from inside, and he saw blue fingers tugging at the
gap.

‘Back off!’ he shouted. ‘I’ll burn you out!’

‘Whoo-is thaaat?’ came a sibilant hiss from inside.

‘Your rescuer. Move away from the door.’

‘Whois whosss?’

It occurred to Forlam then that opening this door might not be such a bright
idea—but, what the hell, he was here now.

‘It’s Forlam, from Captain Ron’s crew.’

‘Forlaam off worldss.’

‘Well, I’m back now. Move away from the door!’

After a moment the fingers retreated and Forlam moved in close. He aimed his
carbine waist-height just at the right of the diagonal gap, and fired. The dun
metal surface glimmered under the laser, then suddenly grew painfully bright.
There followed an intense flash, a smell like molten solder, and a wave of
light and heat threw Forlam staggering back and down on his backside.

‘Oh . . . buggerit,’ was all he could think to say.

‘Prador exotic metal,’ said Thirteen, from somewhere to his side.

Forlam kept blinking, as his vision slowly returned in shades of grey. He
finally noticed the drone hovering to one side of the door, its tail plugged
into some kind of control pit.

‘Are you really sure you want this door open?’

‘Damnit, yes!’ Forlam scrambled to his feet.

A grinding sound from the wall was followed by a thump, as some sort of
hydraulic system caught up with how far the door had already been prised open
by those inside. Its two halves then began to revolve away into the wall, till
the gap was a metre wide. The first figure stepped through, and Forlam
recognized Orbus by his bulk and his clothing—but that was all. As the others
came out after the Captain, Forlam emitted a nervous giggle. They all looked
to be transforming into skinners.

‘Dronsesss!’ Orbus hissed, turning to look down the corridor, then something
snapped past through the air between him and Forlam and exploded against the
nearby wall. As the blast hurled Forlam to the floor again, he saw Thirteen
slam against the far wall. Forlam rolled aside, grabbing for his dropped
carbine, but then saw it glow red, and hurled himself away as it exploded. Hot
metal spattered his back and he rolled trying to extinguish his burning
clothing. Then Orbus came down on him, leech tongue waving.

Oh hell. . .

Orbus spun him over on his face and pulled something searing from his back,
then flipped him over again and, sitting on Forlam’s stomach, held up a
fragment of carbine.

‘Theresss.’

The hot metal sizzled in the Captain’s fingers, till after a moment he tossed
it aside. Then, extruding his leech tongue again, he returned his attention
directly to Forlam.

‘If you’d just like to get off me now?’ Forlam suggested.

There was no need, for another nearby explosion flung Orbus away from him.
Forlam scrambled backwards, away from where the floor seemed to be burning.
Then came a sound he recognized: the stuttering whoosh of a rail-gun firing.
He turned just in time to see a huge Prador drone coming towards him, the
space between him and it blackening with lines of projectiles. Then the
projectiles struck something, igniting a translucent wall before him, bouncing
off it and smashing into the corridor walls, floor and ceiling beyond. When
the drone ceased firing, the wall blinked out.

Hard-field?

Forlam glanced behind to see Orbus and his three crewmen together moving
crablike over to the corridor wall. Behind them a huge nautiloid drone hung in
midair, with Thirteen clutched in one of its minor tentacles. Then it returned
fire at the Prador drone.

Forlam just sat there thinking that now he was going to die. Abruptly it
occurred to him that though such a process might have some fascination, it was
only something you could go through once. He flung himself to the wall.

Another hard-field appeared, but this time the ricochets smashed around on
Forlam’s side of it. One projectile fragment just nicked his ear before
slamming into the wall beside his head. One of Orbus’s crewmen was flung away
from his fellow by three successive hits. Orbus himself negligently pulled a
projectile out of his chest and tossed it aside. It seemed a miracle that they
had not all been chopped to pieces in this potential meat-grinder, then the
firing abruptly ceased.

The safest place, Forlam decided, would be behind one of the drones,
preferably the nautiloid one, which was probably Polity. He began edging along
the wall in that direction, expecting the shooting between the two drones to
start again at any moment. Strangely, nothing happened for long-drawn-out
seconds, then suddenly the Prador drone was withdrawing, and a new vibration
began shaking the ship.

‘That is the sweet sound of a fusion engine test,’ said the Polity drone. ‘And
now the ship’s antigravity is coming online.’

‘Erm,’ was all Forlam managed.

A silver tentacle whipped out, wound around his waist, and hauled him in. He
only realized the others had been grabbed when, drawn close to the drone’s
cold body, he found himself pressed against someone else’s back. Luckily the
woman could not turn her head or extend her tongue far enough, else Forlam
felt sure he would have lost an eye to her.

Then the rescuing drone was moving very fast along the ship’s corridors. A
door disintegrated before it, another stretch of corridor, another door turned
to fragments, then some kind of chamber opening to a triangular patch of sky.
They shot out above a waterfall—sea water pouring from that chamber—then over
the sea. Forlam glimpsed the Prador ship turning, like a city detached from
the ground, till the drone turned sharply and accelerated across the ocean,
cutting that view. He now spotted an island and, distantly, the Sable Keech.
When the drone dipped down towards the island, Forlam prayed he would not be
left there with Orbus and his merry crew. Before he could think to protest, he
was released to drop onto a wooden deck. As immediately he scrambled away from
the woman’s horrible wriggling tongue, his back came to rest against a pair of
solid legs.

‘Well, that’s a bugger—we ain’t got no rope left,’ said a familiar voice.

An equally familiar one added, ‘Nor any harpoons.’

* * * *

The news from one of the passengers, that she had seen some man climbing the
side of the hull carrying two blue corpses on his back, had not attracted
Janer’s attention so much as watching the Prador ship rise from the ocean. Now
the spaceship was just sitting motionless in the sky. It had not reacted to
the Golem sail taking wing, nor had it reacted to a human figure with metal
hands and feet departing the deck, suspended in an AG harness. Now he had
missed out, for after committing murder the Golem sail was gone, and Isis Wade
had gone after it.

‘Here we are,’ said Captain Ron, as they entered the submersible enclosure.

Janer stared at the four lying on the floor. Unlike the two he had earlier
seen up on deck, these were struggling against their bonds, trying to chew
through the cables binding their wrists, when their serpentine tongues did not
get in the way. Seeing Janer and Ron with the six accompanying Hoopers, all
four of them struggled to their feet and tried to make a break for it, issuing
whooping hissing sounds as they ran around the enclosure. Ron stepped back and
closed the door, resting his back against it. He folded his arms. ‘Go get ‘em,
lads.’

The six Hoopers gave chase, quickly clubbing two of the four to the ground and
binding their legs with reels of ducting tape. A third was tackled just before
managing to throw himself out through the shimmer-shield. The fourth ran
straight into Ron’s fist and sat down abruptly with his eyes crossed. Janer
looked down at the gun he had drawn and sighed. Then he looked around,
realizing that here was his opportunity, for Wade had told him Zephyr’s
intended destination. Janer holstered his weapon.

‘Ron, I have to leave,’ he announced.

The Captain raised an eyebrow as, one-handed, he hoisted the stunned Hooper to
his feet. ‘Where?’

‘Places to go, things to do.’ Janer headed for the submersible, climbed the
ladder and stepped into the conning tower. ‘This is important. Don’t try to
stop me.’

Ron was showing no sign of doing any such thing. He waved a dismissive hand at
Janer, then rapped his captive’s head against the wall as the Hooper showed
signs of regaining consciousness.

Janer dropped inside the submersible, sat down in the pilot’s seat and studied
the controls. Simple really. He turned on the screens giving him an outside
view, waited until the Hooper currently between him and the shimmer-shield had
dragged his captive aside, then hit the touch-plate labelled launch.

The acceleration flung him hard back into the seat. Then the shield rapidly
approached, engulfed the sub, and he was hurtling through white water. He
pulled safety straps down and clicked them into place, before taking hold of
the joystick. It was standard simple format: you moved the stick in the
direction you wanted to go, and the further you moved it in that direction the
faster you got there. He pulled the stick up, heard the engine roar behind
him, and felt the seat press up against his backside.

‘Whooo! Hoo!’

The sub leapt from the ocean like a dolphin and came down in an explosion of
spume. A further tinkering with the controls gave him a positional map. On
that he located ‘Olian’s’ clearly marked, experimentally shifted the stick
from side to side so the submersible icon on the map turned, then finally got
it directed towards that same location. He then pushed the stick forwards and
the acceleration forced him back in his seat. Eyeing the many readouts before
him, he wondered if he would recognize one warning him that the engine was
overheating and burning out. Then he relaxed and thought about what he had
learnt: how mistaken had been the young hive mind, and how more deadly were
the intentions of one part of that ancient mind: Zephyr.

Hive minds were now unlikely to send their agents here to obtain sprine.
Firstly, because with all that by now was known about this planet’s life
forms, right down to their genomes, any focused research would ascertain the
poison’s formula offworld. But, secondly and most importantly, because here
was the only place it could be used and the Warden would not allow that. No,
the agent of one half of the ancient hive mind had not come here for that
purpose, since it already possessed the formula.

Wade had explained to him: ‘Each separate part of the mind can work on things
without the other parts knowing. On the planet Hive, the Zephyr part of the
mind synthesized sprine then, using the advanced genetic manipulation
technologies known there, made a virus to destroy it.’

‘But why do that?’ Janer had asked.

‘Because here sprine is Death, and Zephyr wants to kill Death.’

‘You’re saying Zephyr could release that virus at any moment? Do you realize
what might happen? We have to stop him now!’

Wade shook his head. ‘The small quantity Zephyr carries would be unlikely to
survive long enough in this environment to propagate. Any leech infected by it
would quickly die and be destroyed by all the other predators here. In such a
situation the chances of it spreading planetwide are less than ten per cent.’

‘Oh, that’s okay then.’

‘It is, admittedly, an appreciable risk.’

‘How does Zephyr intend to up those odds?’

‘The virus needs to be added to a very large quantity of sprine. With a
sufficient food supply it can double its mass every few minutes, and it will
then spread itself via a form of air- or water-borne sporulation.’

‘A large quantity of sprine?’

Wade had nodded.

‘Olian’s,’ realized Janer.

You waited too long, Wade.

Janer considered what might be the result of Zephyr’s attempt to kill Death.
The collapse of the present planetary economy, which was based on sprine, was
the least significant worry. Through long and painful experience, humans had
learnt how subtly balanced were all ecologies. The big leeches topped the food
chain here, consuming whole other large creatures living in the ocean. Without
them, therefore, their prey would just keep on growing and feeding, wiping out
other species and causing a further cascade of imbalances. All the leeches
would then die out, because it was only the large ones that procreated. Some
might think that a good thing. It was not. If they were lucky, some new
balance might be restored—in about ten thousand years or so. Quite possibly
the entire biosphere would collapse into something almost Precambrian.

Janer tried forcing the joystick even further forward, but it was already at
its limit.

* * * *

With her single remaining eye, the giant whelk gazed behind herself and down
towards the beach. Observing swarms of juvenile rhinoworms gradually venturing
ashore, she again tested the ropes securing her, but found little give in
them. There was even less give in the numerous harpoons embedded in her flesh,
for it had healed around them, holding them firmer. She was now so exhausted
and hungry she found it difficult to think. When she did manage to mull over
what had happened, she felt hurt. It seemed almost like the betrayal of some
contract in which she pursued the ships and they fled. They should not have
stopped and ambushed her in this way. That was so unfair.

Turning her eye further, to study her shell, she observed that the split in it
had nearly closed up. With luck it would be fully sealed before the rhinoworms
started chewing pieces out of her, for if those things found their way in
there, to her softer parts, it would all be quickly over. However, if she
remained trapped here like this, she would still die. It might take them
longer to munch away her harder extremities, but they would never give up. She
struggled again, the harpoon wounds aching in her flesh and the trees around
her shaking. Some of them did loosen a bit, but the taut ropes binding her to
immovable outcrops of rock prevented her getting the leverage to pull the
looser trees completely free. Then, vibrating through the ground from the
ocean bed, she heard a familiar thumping.

The male whelk was out there. If she could attract him in he might be able to
free her, but to do that she needed to free at least one tentacle. She
struggled again, some of the ropes definitely slacker now, but every effort
left her weaker. She focused her attention on one tentacle only: the one from
which the fishing line depended. There was a harpoon driven right through it,
a metre back from the tip of it. Folding that tip up, she could just touch the
thick rope stretching taut from the harpoon’s shaft to a nearby tree. That was
all she could manage, but remembering how the fishing line had cut so easily
through heirodont flesh and gristle, she now had an idea. Flipping the free
extremity of tentacle, she whipped the line up from the sandy soil. It looped
up and touched the rope, before dropping down again. After five attempts she
got part of it up and over the rope, but it slid off again. On her fourteenth
attempt it went over, and she finally caught hold of the line’s loose end with
her tentacle tip, wrapping it round securely. Just then pain messages began to
register from some of her other tentacles. The rhinoworms were beginning to
tentatively gnaw on her flesh.

Pulling on the line itself only tugged the rope down, making the harpoon tilt.
It was only by accident, when her grip slipped for a moment and she drew the
line across the rope, that she observed a few severed fibres spring up.
Urgently, she began sawing the line back and forth.

By now some of the rhinoworms, finding she was not retaliating, were biting a
lot harder, and the commotion they were making was attracting many more who
were heading rapidly up from the beach.

Finally, the rope parted, and the giant whelk twisted her tentacle to snap off
the harpoon haft. Then reaching over to snatch up the most persistent
rhinoworm, she raised the writhing creature and used it like a rubber
drumstick to beat a tattoo on her shell. The male whelk out at sea responded
with an excited drumming. The rhinoworm, its skull now shattered, she fed
under her skirt, to her beak, and quickly devoured. Now she reached round to
tackle the next harpoon, trying to tug it out. But it was stuck solid and,
with its rope still attached, she could not get enough leverage with just one
tentacle to break the haft. At least there was less urgency now the rhinoworms
had retreated a little way. Realizing that once she freed another tentacle
things would get very much easier, she looped the line over another rope and
again began to saw. She was about halfway through when the waiting rhinoworms
began running for cover. A crusted shell had broken the ocean’s surface and
begun to head ashore.

Extending her remaining eye rearwards, the female giant whelk watched the male
approach. She did not like the look of his shell for, encrusted like that, it
looked untidy, and meant he spent most of his time on the bottom. He was
smaller, as all males were, but it struck her that this one was particularly
scrawny. He oozed onto the sand, moved up to the edge of the clearing and
halted, focusing both eyes down to where a rope was tied around a rocky
outcrop. He tracked the rope up to the harpoon embedded in her body, then his
eyes swung apart to take in the other ropes. She tugged briefly on a couple of
them to be sure he got the idea. He paused, mulling the situation over, then
reached out a tentacle and plucked the nearest rope like a guitar string. She
wondered if he was particularly thick when he moved aside and chose to slide
towards her up the lane between two ropes, careful to avoid dislodging any of
them. When he reached her and reared up, extruding the long, tubular, glassy
corkscrew of his penis, she realized he had certainly assessed the situation
here.

Angrily the giant female thrashed back at him with her one free tentacle,
which was larger and more powerful than any of his. But, having all his free,
he caught hold of it and held it down against her shell. His penis partially
unwound, probing under the back lip of her shell. At this point, instinct took
over in her, and she extruded some of her softer body from underneath her
shell. His penis felt this, and snapped out straight, stabbing deep inside
her. Feeling something that was both pain and pleasure she emitted a hissing
squeal. Letting loose a series of whistling hoots, he began rocking back and
forth, his penis groping around between her internal organs. One organ
reacted, opening with a ripping feeling inside her, and he soon found it. She
bucked hard in reaction, and observed a couple of trees go crashing down. His
flailing about dislodged one rope so its looped end snapped up free of the
outcrop to which it was secured. This constant rocking motion loosened a
harpoon embedded near his entry point, and the growing mass of slime there
lubricated its progress out of her body. Then, with a final long-drawn-out
hoot he filled her up, and with a gasp came to rest flat and limp against her.

Screwing itself back out of her, his penis dropped flaccid into the sand.

The female felt strangely invigorated by this mating. Peering at the male, she
observed his eyes blinking tiredly, and felt his grip slackening. Pulling her
tentacle free, she snatched up the loose harpoon and drove it deep between his
eyes. He squealed and retreated, becoming entangled in a fallen tree. Turning,
she brought more trees crashing down and snapped two more ropes. Now with four
tentacles unrestrained, she used them to snap harpoon shafts one after
another, till finally breaking free. Her assailant meanwhile crushed his way
over foliage and began heading back for the shore. She surged forward, picked
up the relevant rope and waited. As the rope drew taut, he was jerked to a
halt. Gradually she began to reel him in, clacking her beak the while. The
reversal would have been lost on her: he’d had his way with her and now,
dinner.

* * * *

20

Lung Bird:
this creature seems to be an abortive attempt by the life of Spatterjay to get
into the skies. They appear to be perpetually on the point of coming apart and
possess a sparse covering of long oily feathers, between which is exposed
purplish septic-looking flesh. Seen stationary on a branch, a lung bird looks
like a half-plucked crow that has been dead for a week or more. But they are a
fascinating oddity. On close inspection it can be seen that their beaks are
extensions of a light carapace that entirely covers them, as are their
feathers, for these birds have no internal skeleton. They are in fact closely
related to the glisters, being crustaceans that took to the air. However,
close inspection of lung birds is not something to be enjoyed by any human,
and most investigation into these creatures is conducted by telefactor or by
the planetary Warden, for the creature’s body is heavily laden with
putrescine, which comes from their main diet of putrephallus weeds—

Erlin gazed back at the Prador spaceship, hovering just out from the island
which the Sable Keech was now rounding. It was itself a metal island, clouds
forming around it as sea water boiled off hot cowlings then recondensed in the
air.

What’s it waiting for? she wondered, and as if in response to her silent query
its fusion engines sputtered and sent the leviathan slowly drifting away. She
pursed her lips. At least now, with every second that passed, the chances were
reduced of them being caught in the middle of some bombardment from orbit.

‘Look,’ said Sable Keech himself, now standing beside her.

‘I see it,’ she replied.

Lowering his monocular, he caught her shoulder. ‘No there.’ He pointed
the island shallows where a Hooper ship was making its way out to sea.
progress was necessarily slow because its rear mast was missing and it
sailing under some temporary rig manipulated by its living sail. Erlin
the monocular Keech passed to her and studied the vessel. At first she
recognize it, because of its current rig, then realization hit home.

towards
Its
was
took
did not

‘The Treader,’ she breathed, then directed her attention to the deck. There
seemed a lot of Hoopers aboard, and she wondered what Ambel had got himself
into now.

‘Why’s it here?’ Keech asked.

Abruptly Erlin felt guilty, understanding that the Old Captain may have come
in pursuit of herself. There seemed no other explanation for him to be way out
here, and she wondered if she deserved such concern.

‘Perhaps we should tell . . .’ she began, but there was no need. The Sable
Keech was slowing and turning. ‘Right,’ she said. ‘Right.’ She turned and
pushed back through the door leading into the Tank Rooms. She headed over to a
nearby restraint table and rested her bottom against it. Looking mildly
puzzled, Keech followed her in. She did not want to deal with what she was
feeling at that moment, and did not want him asking her questions. Instead she
eyed the new occupants of the restraint tables: six Hoopers—dosed up with
Intertox but still fighting their bonds—and three others.

‘Maybe we should just drop him over the side,’ she suggested, eyeing the
closest to her of the latter. That was not an acceptable Polity approach, but
certainly how Captain Ron would like to deal with the problem.

Strapped naked to his table, Bloc showed no sign of movement. She studied his
exposed injuries with belated interest, wondering what the hell had originally
killed him. Aesop and Bones also lay immobile on tables nearby.

‘Were I not an Earth Monitor, I would tend to agree,’ said Keech. ‘But I want

to take him back with me. Would that be possible?’

‘Aesop and Bones, too?’ she asked.

‘Certainly,’ he replied. ‘Tell me, why did Bloc just collapse like that?’

Erlin glanced at the status lights on Bloc’s cleansing unit, which was
positioned on a tray folded out from the restraint table. All showed red, and
one of the pipes connecting into the reif’s body was black with fouled balm.
She then picked up a palm console, connected via an optic cable into the
cleanser, and studied its readout.

‘He seized up—not enough memory space for all the information he was
processing.’ She gestured at Aesop and Bones. ‘Rather than use one unit to
control one thrall, as do the Prador, his unit is partitioned. The readings
I’ve been getting show three main partitions, and I’ve been able to assign two
of these to Aesop and Bones. The third one is wide-band, its channel operating
twenty-seven thralls in parallel. I thought at first this was to control
twenty-seven reifs, but that could not possibly work. Again, checking dates, I
found that eleven of the thralls went offline while Bloc was on Mortuary
Island, before I arrived. Then a further seven of them went offline at just
about the time the hooder lost its head.’

Keech grimaced. ‘The figure twenty-seven tells me all I need to know. The
number of the beast, you might say—that’s how many body segments a hooder
possesses.’

‘He obviously controlled it, though I’d question the extent of that control
with him needing to use grazer pheromone to mark out its victims. Anyway, as
those eighteen thralls were destroyed, they scrambled formatting in his memory
space. Then the Prador somehow linked through the remaining hooder thralls,
thereby controlling him. It also used him as a conduit for a while in order to
run some sort of mathematical program in the minds of those other two. But
that alone wasn’t what pushed him to the limit. His viral infection was
causing more and more diagnostic programs to run in his reification hardware,
and as a result more error messages kept coming up, taking up more memory
space. Then I think the sight of you pushed him over the edge.’

‘Is that mathematical program actually running now?’

‘It did shut down, but out of interest I recorded some of it. Now I’m running
it cyclically with some strong memory he has retained, to keep him locked in a
virtual loop.’

‘How’s his viral condition now?’

‘Pretty far gone—at about the stage you were at when you resorted to using
your nanochanger.’ She gestured to the others. ‘Aesop over there is nowhere
near as bad. In fact there are many in a worse state aboard this ship, and,’
she gestured, ‘already in these tanks.’

‘Bones?’ Keech asked.

‘He’s beyond infection. Take a look.’

Keech moved over to Bones and pulled back the reif’s hood. A bare skull
grinned up at him, its lensed eyes shuttered and the tip of a metallic tongue
protruding between the teeth. He opened the reif’s jacket for further
confirmation, and eyed the bare ribcage exposed.

‘He was called Bones when he was still alive,’ Keech noted.

‘Perhaps it amused Bloc to have him resemble his name. I wouldn’t be
surprised. So, what about Bloc? What do you want me to do with him?’

‘Can you shut down his control unit? I’d rather he retained no control over
these two.’

‘Doubtful. I’ve had a look and it’s closely interfaced with his memory
crystal, so one mistake might wipe him out’—she shrugged—‘which would be no
bother to me, but is obviously not what you want. How did you know about it
anyway? Forlam said you already knew about the thralls.’

‘Bloc was a student of esoteric or alien technologies even before he died. I
found that out when I was researching him, just as I found out that some time
back he had purchased spider thralls through an agent on Coram. That he had
already used the technology seemed the only proper explanation to account for
Aesop and Bones. Altering a Prador thrall to control memcrystal would have
been no problem to him.’ Keech walked back and stood looking down at Bloc
again. ‘Would our best option be him shutting down his own hardware?’

Erlin stared at Keech for a long moment, running her fingers across the scar

tissue on her neck. She frowned, then realization dawned.

‘My recent problems must have scrambled my brain,’ she said. ‘It happened to
you: the changer rebuilds the organic brain and then the program causes a
complete download to it from the memcrystal before shutting the whole memplant
down. Of course, this is presupposing the organic brain does get rebuilt
fully.’

Keech shrugged. ‘It is a risk, agreed.’

Erlin nodded, then unplugged the optic cable from Bloc’s cleanser, wrapped it
round her palm console, then put the console aside. From a table nearby on
which she had piled Bloc’s clothing prior to examining him, she retrieved his
nanochanger. On pressing an inset button on top of Bloc’s cleanser, a lid
nipped up exposing a recess for the lozenge-shaped changer.

‘Well, here goes.’ Erlin pressed the changer into place, while Keech moved
over to stand beside her. The lozenge clamped down and from all around its
edges extruded small golden tubes which mated into sockets in the cleanser.
The status lights then turned blue. ‘Okay, let’s get him into a tank and all
connected up. He’ll have to forgo his intended prior visit to the Little
Flint.’ She glanced around at the other tanks in use. ‘He won’t be alone,
anyway.’

Half an hour later as Bloc was floating in his tank,
and optics plugged in through his suppurating flesh,
Glancing past Keech while she wiped her hands, Erlin
Hoopers dragging in other Hoopers bound up squirming

autodoc clinging to him
the door banged open.
observed a crowd of
in sail cloth.

‘Looks like my workload just increased,’ she muttered.

* * * *

The body of her rapist assuaged her hunger for a little while, but her insides
processed his meat like a combined waste compactor and acid bath. Her guts
bubbling and squirming, she crashed through the forest sending lung birds
honking from their perches in the branches. Then, encountering a stand of
putrephallus over which more of those horrible baggy birds squabbled, she
turned and made her way down to the shore and into the sea. She could feel the
organ he had penetrated expanding in slow pulses within her. Her ichor was
thundering in her veins. Sometimes it became difficult to think.

Bloated and heavy she no longer floated, and had to push herself off the
bottom again and again. Her hunger returned with confusing speed so, moving
deeper, she began feeding upon negative-buoyant masses of young rhinoworm
corpses. Then a hint of a taste permeated the water, and with it the slow
return of vague memory. Yet it was a difficult memory to hold onto, since
eating and that growth inside her now seemed so much more important. Bouncing
aimlessly along the seabed she tried to regain her earlier sense of purpose,
and to recall how it had felt to swim. It was only happenstance that took her
to where that taste in the water grew stronger. And her intellect made another
bid for freedom.

Something huge churned the water directly above her, as a shape, vaster than
any heirodont, turned. Gazing up at the enormous hull, she tried to control
her fear, her overpowering urge to return to feed in the island shallows and .
. . something else. Then recognizing the smaller hull being dragged around in
the wake of the larger one, she threw all her effort into launching herself
from the bottom, using her skirt of blow-water jets to force herself higher.
She was thirty metres down from it when the smaller hull began to draw away.
With one more jet, she snaked out her longest tentacle and snagged the ship’s
rudder. Then, her grip failing, she pulled quickly closer and whipped out
another tentacle. Now the sea was roaring past her and she could not
understand how the ship could be pulling away with such force. Another
tentacle, then another two. Drawing herself in, utterly exhausted, she clamped
her skirt around the hull and sucked down to stick there. In a moment she
would reach up to see what she could find. In a moment though, after just a
little rest. . .

* * * *

Sniper observed that Vrell’s ship was taking the slowest route into orbit,
climbing steadily around the planet rather than going straight up. The
Warden’s sat-eyes were everywhere above the ascending ship, and above them
Vrost maintained position. The ship came lumbering up out of the well, its
gravmotors continually going on and off, sometimes dropping it back many
kilometres, and the fusion drive partially igniting then extinguishing.

‘Does he think Vrost is going to believe that wounded bird act for even a
moment?’ asked Thirteen. The little drone had purposely fused itself into
place on Sniper’s armour, and now resembled some baroque marine encrustation.

‘There’s a double bluff here somewhere,’ Sniper replied. It was all an
interesting game with ostensibly only one outcome. Once clear of the planet,
Vrell’s spaceship would be obliterated. Sniper, staying low over the sea just
behind the escort of drones and armoured Prador surrounding the ship, was
trying to fathom what was really going on.

‘Then perhaps he thinks he can manage a U-space jump before Vrost gets a
chance to smear him across the sky?’ Thirteen suggested.

‘Vrell’s options are limited. More likely he hopes to ram Vrost’s ship—to go
down fighting. That’s what an adolescent Prador would do,’ said Sniper.

‘But Vrell is an adult.’

‘Take a look at this,’ said Sniper, transmitting some image files across to
Thirteen. The little drone fell silent, its coms shutting down as it applied
its system space to study the images. Could Vrell properly be described as an
adult, or even a Prador at all? Thirteen could decide that for itself after
viewing what Sniper had obtained from the camera in the drone cache of Vrell’s
ship. Sniper felt the images indicated otherwise, just as they had for these
armoured creatures ahead, for one of them had been driven from its armour in
that cache. Sniper tried some more surreptitious scans, but again could not
penetrate their defences. What was going to happen here seemed almost
foregone, and it seemed his prime task now was to gather intelligence by
whatever means.

‘Sniper, what are you doing?’ the Warden abruptly asked.

In reply Sniper sent the images to the AI as well.

After a pause the Warden replied, ‘I see, you wish further confirmation. My
own attempt to probe that Prador armour resulted in the destruction of both it
and its occupant. What are you hoping to achieve here?’

Sniper now sent a snippet from a lecture he had recorded several centuries
ago. ‘During any conflict, combatants tend to drop their guard in matters not
directly related to that same conflict.’

‘Yes, Sniper, I have fifty thousand hours of recorded intelligence briefings
available to me. Why do you think I now have every one of my sat-eyes deployed
in the area?’

‘It’s not just that,’ the old drone finally replied. ‘Something else is going
on here. And when I’ve figured out what that fucking Vrell is up to, I might
be able to find some further opening.’

‘Very well. Keep me informed.’ The Warden withdrew.

Sniper continued cruising behind the pack, trying every subtle scan he could
manage. He began to wonder if, for the benefit of ECS Intelligence, he should
bring one of those armoured Prador down once the shooting started, and
squirrel it away for later examination. Analysing recorded events, however, he
realized that was not viable. As well as the one indirectly caused by the
Warden, similar minor fusion explosions had occurred both under the sea and in
the air during the earlier attack upon Vrell’s ship—doubtless the result of
armoured individuals getting damaged beyond hope of recovery, and therefore
self-destructing. Vrost would not be leaving any of his troops behind intact,
not even as anything more than radioactive gas.

It was while he was running a narrow-beam microwave scan that Sniper
incidentally noted a disturbance in the water below him. He peered down to see
something speeding along underwater. At first he suspected a heirodont, but it
was travelling too fast. Just as he redirected his microwave scan downwards,
the object broke the surface, revealing itself as one of the armoured King’s
Guard. It had probably just self-repaired on the ocean bed and was now
hastening to rejoin its comrades. Suddenly he realized that his scan was not
being blocked, so redirected all his scanning gear downwards just as the
Prador emerged from the ocean. Sniper found he was getting everything. The
images from the camera in the drone cache had provided much information, but
now scanning across the spectrum gave him so very much more. Momentarily
shutting off his AG, he dropped down beside the armoured entity and probed
deep, mapping the architecture of the armour and the entire external and
internal anatomy contained within it. His recording of its brain structure
would surely be invaluable to forensic Polity AIs. He then recognized scan
returns similar to those obtained from Spatterjay wildlife. This Prador was
infected by the virus, which had wrought its evident mutations.

Suddenly the Prador turned towards him, then like a woman realizing her blouse
is undone, began buttoning up its screens. Too late. Sniper now knew the shape
of the beast. And the physical sample he retained inside himself from the
drone cache gave him its genetic blueprint. The secret was out.

It was only as the armoured Prador sped away that Sniper realized something
else about that individual, and he began laughing to himself over the ether.

‘What’s so funny?’ asked Thirteen, reopening com.

‘Yes, do tell,’ interjected the Warden, rather sharply.

‘In good time,’ said Sniper. ‘In good time.’ Then he locked the Warden out.

* * * *

As she sat viewing the comscreen on her desk, Olian Tay felt more than pleased
with her new incarnation as president of the Bank of Spatterjay. The huge
wealth she was accumulating enabled her to pursue her life’s work; her museum.
It just kept on growing as new evidence of Hoop’s rule here was unearthed.
Items were also turning up on other worlds, for which mostly she was able to
outbid the competition, and now, with the recent detente between the Polity
and the Third Kingdom, she was able to purchase some things directly from the
Prador themselves. Currently her bid for a man-skin coat once worn by Jay
Hoop’s wife, Rebecca Frisk—who was floating in her preserving cylinder just
outside the door—was the highest. She was also very excited by the possibility
of actually travelling to the Kingdom to view at first hand Frisk’s erstwhile
home on a Prador world. Everything was going wonderfully well. Till she heard
the sawing explosions.

Olian stood up and walked around her desk. At that same moment the two
skinless Golem currently serving out their Cybercorp indenture with her, and
whom she had named Chrome, both of them, because she could not tell them
apart, pushed themselves away from their normal stance at the walls.

‘What was that?’ she wondered.

‘It sounded like the blast of an energy weapon,’ one of the Golem replied
succinctly.

‘Then I suggest you both arm yourselves. We’re closed to any withdrawals at
present and I would like us to remain that way.’

One of them palmed the lock to a wall cabinet and opened it. He took out a
riot gun and tossed it to his companion, then selected a Batian carbine for
himself. As the two of them headed out into the foyer, Olian followed just in
time to hear a hideous shrieking from beyond the twin doors accessing the
museum. The Golem paused and glanced round at her; at her nod they opened the
doors and went through. After a moment she stepped after them, then quickly to
one side where she groped back to thumb the touch-plate right beside the
pillar containing David Grenant. The lights came on.

The far doors into the museum were still closed, but there was obviously
something wrong. By the statue of the Skinner loomed what appeared to be some
metallic edifice, and the floor all around it was scattered with debris. She
looked up and noted a large hole through the ceiling, then down again as that
edifice screamed and extended wide metallic wings. Turquoise fire flashed
between it and the statue. Olian threw herself to the floor as a boom
resounded, followed by the sound of something collapsing.

Blinking to clear her vision, she looked up to see the Skinner statue was now
a pile of smoking rubble. The other thing turned—and she now recognized the
Golem sail whose arrival on Spatterjay had been the source of much
speculation. One of her own Golem zipped back past her, and back into her
office, returning with a heavy-duty laser of the kind normally mounted on a
tripod.

‘We may not be able to stop him,’ the Golem warned, before darting off back
into the museum.

At that point the other skeletal guard stepped out from his hiding place
behind a thrall display case and started firing explosive shells at the Golem
sail. Hitting one after another, his shots drove the sail gradually backwards
but seemed to cause no damage. The intruder’s eyes glowed and then a particle
beam swept across the room, chopping off the Golem’s legs before striking the
display case. The Golem collapsed. Nothing happened to the display for a
moment, but even tough chainglass could not withstand such abuse. It emitted a
screeing sound escalating out of human hearing range, then flew apart in a
glittering explosion. Olian quickly crawled backwards into the foyer, closing
the doors behind her. Flinching at the sound of another case getting wrecked,
she returned to her office and took a seat behind her desk.

Punching controls on her console she said, ‘Warden, I seem to have a little
problem here.’ When there came no reply, she tried routing through the
planetary server, then glared at the holding graphic on her screen. It meant
the Warden was not answering calls.

From inside the museum, closer now, came the thrumming snap-crack of a laser
firing. Olian closed her eyes and shook her head. This made no sense at all.
What would a Golem sail want here? She began to stand up, then checked
herself. If two Golem guards could do nothing, then there was nothing she
could do either. Sitting down again, she grimaced upon hearing the foyer doors
being ripped off their hinges, then ducked down as her own office door
exploded inwards. She peered up over her desk just as the Golem sail loomed
through, sat upright, flicking smouldering splinters from her jacket, then
finally looked up.

‘Yes, what can I do for you?’

The sail just stood there, half extending its wings, then drawing them back.
Its mouth opened and closed as if it had lost the power of speech, and that
dangerous glow advanced and retreated in its eyes.

‘Olian Tay,’ it finally said.

‘Yes, I am. You do realize we are closed today?’

‘Olian Tay . . . open the safe.’

Oh right, Olian thought, a bank robbery.

* * * *

Erlin had learnt that the Sable Keech’s engines were steam-driven—the steam
pumped directly from fusion-powered water purifiers—and, being Polity tech,
could run at full speed almost indefinitely. The ship would therefore reach
the Little Flint far ahead of schedule. Even so, she wondered if any of the
reified passengers would survive to see that place.

Stooping over one tank, she observed its gross contents, studied readouts and
sighed. Some of the reified passengers would never again inhabit their own
bodies, and others were irretrievably dead. This one, for example, had just
been turned into an organic broth by his nanochanger. Even his bones were
gone. All that remained were his reification hardware and memcrystal, and even
they were under attack.

Erlin keyed a certain sequence into her console, and watched as the opaque
fluid began to swirl, then bubble. It was risky to just dump the contents of a
tank like this, as though it was unlikely the nanites could survive in the
surrounding environment—being specialized and with special requirements—some
of them might. The liquid began to steam, the smell of it horribly like
cooking stew. When she was finally satisfied, Erlin keyed in another
instruction and the tank began to drain. But even now the liquid was still
dangerous, which was why it drained into a purification plant in the bilge,
where the water was evaporated off and the residue treated with diatomic acid.

Erlin had drained three similar tanks only this morning, and retrieved three
memcrystals. The crystals themselves she externally flash-sterilized before
scanning them for active nanites. One was corrupted—some mutation of the
nanites from the individual’s nanofactory eating into the crystal. Fifty-seven
reifs had gone into the tanks, and thus far not one of them had attained
resurrection. Fourteen in fact had been flushed into the purifier, and only
nine of their memcrystals remained intact. Were she a reif herself, she would
not think those good odds at all.

Erlin looked around. Forlam was still here—a Hooper with whom she felt a
reluctant kinship—and she recognized Peck and one or two others of Ambel’s

crew scattered about the large room, carrying out tasks she had assigned to
them. Still no sign of the Captain himself, though.

She walked over to Bloc’s tank and peered inside. There was a lot of detritus
floating around in the water, even more lying in a silty layer at the bottom,
but she could see fresh new skin down one leg, where one large sludgy scab had
fallen away, and a flexing pink hand. She checked the displays and confirmed
that Bloc was undergoing download. He was near to resurrection now, and his
memcrystal downloading to his organic brain. His control unit, attached to
that crystal, was no longer within his mental compass. It seemed doubly ironic
to Erlin that the one here most deserving to remain dead looked the most
likely to live. Turning away she spotted a certain individual entering the
Tank Room, and suddenly felt horribly guilty—a child knowing she has done
wrong. He crossed the room and loomed beside her.

‘An interesting and adventurous rescue attempt, I hear,’ she managed, her
mouth dry as she turned to him.

‘It had its moments,’ Ambel replied. He studied her closely. ‘Did you need
rescuing?’

‘A sail performed that task when the danger was greatest to me.’ She shrugged.
‘Subsequent dangers were not so immediate. Bloc had no wish to harm me, just
control me, and I doubt there was much even you could have done about giant
waves and Prador spaceships.’ She knew she was avoiding his implicit question.

‘I asked you if you needed rescuing,’ he said again.

She turned back to him. ‘I don’t think so.’ She waved a hand at the chainglass
tanks all around them. ‘I am busy now, and will be busy for some time to come.
Who can say what will happen then? As you once told me: I need to accumulate
years.’

Ambel nodded thoughtfully. ‘Ron tells me there’s a nice bar just forard of
here. You’ll join me there later?’

‘I will.’ Erlin returned to her work and he moved away, calling out the
occasional question to those of his crew who were scattered about the room.
His implicit question had been, ‘Do you want to die?’ She felt she did not,
realizing that a giant whelk had taught her that lesson, and that her time
here aboard the Sable Keech had only confirmed it. But she knew that such a
feeling could be deceptive. Was her unconscious even now planning her next
suicide attempt, or had she at last, having passed her quarter millennium,
crossed some watershed?

* * * *

Janer smiled to himself as he brought the submersible up against the jetty.
Wade, moving slowly across the sky suspended from his grav-harness, must have
been experiencing some difficulties for Janer to overtake him. That was good,
for Janer could now do what he suspected Wade would not. Ahead, just before
pulling in, he had observed Zephyr spiralling down to Olian’s island. Now,
staring at the screen, he registered expressions of confusion from Hoopers
peering down at the vessel in search of its mooring ropes. He touched the
anchor icon on the control screen, and heard the double thumps of four
harpoons, trailing anchor wires, fired from the sub to the left and right,
angled down into the seabed. Four reel icons then appeared, with an overlay of
a top view of the submersible and the nearby jetty. He ignored the icons,
touched the sub picture and dragged it across to the jetty. The anchor wires
adjusted themselves accordingly, slackening on one side and pulling taut on
the other, drawing the vessel up against the adjacent support beams. Janer
then abandoned his seat and climbed out.

Now the Hoopers appeared to be less interested in finding mooring ropes than
in something else that was happening inland. Others were emerging onto the
decks of their ships to peer in the same direction.

As he stepped down onto the planking, Janer queried the nearest of them: ‘What
happened?’

The Hooper, a bulky woman who had lost all her hair and compensated for that
with a white skull tattoo of writhing snakes, glanced at him. ‘Explosion, back
at Olian’s.’

Janer immediately broke into a run.

‘Wait a minute!’ the woman called, but he ignored her and kept going.

Wade would be setting down on the island very soon, but what would the Golem
do then? Zephyr had already killed two organic sails, and was now blowing
things up. That meant the time for negotiation and metaphysical discussion was
over. Janer did not want to bet Spatterjay’s whole economy and biosphere on
Wade’s reluctance to act. Entering a street lined with stalls, he drew his
gun. All around, Hoopers and a few Polity citizens were stepping outdoors to
see what all the commotion was about. He dodged between them and soon caught
sight of the entrance to Olian’s museum. Hoopers were gathered there around
the closed, and firmly bolted, doors. Janer ran up behind them and pushed
through.

‘Can you get in?’ he asked of those Hoopers right next to the doors.

‘I don’t think so,’ said a figure standing beside him—he smelt the pipe
tobacco before he recognised Captain Sprage. ‘These doors were made to keep
out Hoopers, including even us Captains. Not very trusting, Olian.’

Two others stepped up beside Sprage. One, tall and long-limbed, bore a
disconcerting similarity to the Skinner, the other was red as chilli pepper
and built like a barrel.

Sprage introduced them: ‘Captains Cormarel and Tranbit... I don’t think you’ve
met them, young Janer.’

Janer glanced at them, then around at the crowd. If he fired his weapon here,
people could get hurt—and annoyed. And these were not the kind to have annoyed
at you. ‘I can’t explain now—it would take too long. Sorry, but I have to get
inside.’

He turned and hurried away, hearing the squat Tranbit say, ‘Hasty lad, there.’

Janer pushed back through the crowd and around the corner of the museum. The
ground here was covered with modified grass, greenish purple, stretching back
a hundred metres towards the dingle. The long stone side-wall of the building
was unrelieved by windows, and Janer ran along it to where it abutted Olian’s
bank itself. Stepping back five metres, he knocked his gun to its non-standard
setting, pointed and fired.

A large section of stonework, all of three metres in circumference,
disappeared with a screaming crash, thenreappeared as an explosion of dust and
compacted stone shrapnel. Janer hit the ground, hot flakes of stone dropping
all over him. Then, with his ears ringing, he shoved himself up again and
groped forward through the thick cloud to find the hole created. Visibility
inside the museum was as bad, but at least he had some idea of the direction
he must go. He stumbled on something, glimpsed a Golem metal skull amid the
debris, and moved beyond it to a chainglass cylinder lying on the ground.
Inside this he observed Rebecca Frisk writhing slowly and dragging her
fingernails down the glass. He shivered and stepped over her towards the
wrecked door.

Then suddenly a figure was standing beside him.

‘This is not your concern,’ said Isis Wade.

Janer turned abruptly, bringing his weapon to bear on the Golem. But he was
far far too slow—Wade’s hand snapped down, caught his wrist and squeezed.
Janer yelled as his wrist bones ground together. As he dropped his gun, Wade
kicked it clattering into the settling murk.

‘I’m sorry,’ the Golem murmured, then almost in an eyeblink, was gone.

‘Fuck,’ said Janer, rubbing his wrist. He stumbled off in search of the
singun. Without it he could do nothing.

* * * *

‘Open the door or I will remove it,’ demanded the Golem sail.

Olian decided it was pointless to pretend she could not get them inside. The
wreckage behind her ably demonstrated the sail’s lack of patience. She took a
big iron key from her pocket, twisted it in the lock, and pushed the door
open. The space beyond used to be her house’s main living room. Now it was
clear of all furnishings, which had been relocated to her new home built to
one side of the museum. Stepping in, she glanced up at the security drone
suspended from the ceiling, and quickly stepped aside.

‘Intruder, identify yourself! Verbal permission not—’

The sail’s eye’s flashed, and the drone exploded into molten slag that
spattered right to the far windows. Olian ducked, her arms over her head, as
five more explosions ensued. When she looked up, she saw the five weapons pits
in the walls had been turned into smoking cavities.

‘Open the false wall,’ the sail instructed.

Olian considered her rehearsed line: ‘The security system has now put a
five-hour lock-down on the safe. I cannot open it’ but she doubted this one
would have any truck with that. The creature had just demonstrated a
surprising knowledge of what this room contained.

‘House computer, open false wall,’ she murmured reluctantly.

The wall seemingly holding the two windows began to slide sideways. Their view
of distant dingle blinked out, revealing them as screens. A large, utterly
smooth, oval door came into view behind.

‘Open the safe,’ the Golem sail ordered.

Olian paused, remembering the last time she had been forced to do so—by
Rebecca Frisk and her Batian mercenaries. On that occasion, Olian had duped
them, managing to slip into the safe and close it again from the inside. Even
so, one of the bitch’s mercenaries had still managed to shoot her in the leg.
And this Golem sail, with a particle cannon under its mental control, would
possess reactions a hundred times faster, so attempting a similar ruse would
be futile.

‘House computer, cancel lock-down and open atmosphere safe,’ she said flatly.

With a deep clonk and a clicking hiss, the door—a great bung of Prador exotic
metal—swung open to reveal a highly polished spherical chamber. In here Olian
had once kept her prized possession: David Grenant. Now it contained stacks of
brushed-aluminium boxes.

‘Aaah,’ the sail hissed.

It advanced with its waddling sail gait and ducked its long neck inside the
safe. After peering at the boxes for a moment, it struck down like a snake,
catching the boxes in its teeth and ripping them open, and slinging them
around the interior of the safe. Chainglass vials spilt out, their stoppers
coming loose, till sprine spread over the floor like red sand.

What’s this?

Olian backed away as far as she could get—breathing sprine dust could be fatal
to her.

Satisfied with the chaos it had made, the sail backed out. Stretching out its
wing like a cloak, it coughed up a small polished sphere and spat it into one

of its spider-claws. It then swung round on Olian with its back to the safe.
Dipping its head towards her, it blinked and said, ‘You can go.’ Then it
turned to face the door through which they had entered. Olian got out of there
just as fast as she could.

* * * *

Aesop stared up at the pipework on the ceiling, and felt some species of joy.
He was free, he could feel it: Bloc no longer controlled him. And he had
survived: he had not been eaten by a hooder, nor destroyed in some mad scheme
of Bloc’s. Here, now, strapped to a table, he was freer than he had been in
years. But what had happened?

Vaguely he recollected the fight in the bridge, then some kind of mad
revelation and an overloading backlash from Bloc. He realized that his current
vagueness about it all was because he could not connect his previous actions
while under Bloc’s control to the self he felt now. A face loomed over him,
peering down.

‘You’re not too bad,’ said the woman, Erlin. ‘But, like them all, you’re
infected with the Spatterjay virus. What are we to do with you?’

Another face then appeared. It was familiar, but for the moment he could not
place it.

‘Under Polity law, no guilt attaches to him for everything he did while under
Bloc’s control,’ said the man. ‘But he and Bones probably killed Bloc before
that.’

‘Debatable,’ said Erlin, turning to the man, ‘what with Bloc coming back to
life. Would the charge be assault?’

‘They almost certainly killed others before Bloc.’

‘Yes, I imagine they did,’ Erlin replied. ‘But you realize that you might not
be allowed to take any of them back?’

‘Yes, I understand that. Polity law is not the only law.’

Suddenly Aesop realized who the man was. It was Sable Keech. He felt a surge
of some unidentifiable emotion, then wondered why. Such would be the reaction
of a cultist, or one of Bloc’s Kladites—but it was not for Aesop. He began
thinking hard about his present situation. If Keech took them back, they would
be AI-probed and all their crimes revealed. No possible plea would then
prevent their complete erasure from existence.

‘I won’t cause any trouble,’ he said to Erlin.

‘And what about your friend?’ she asked, looking to one side.

Aesop glanced over and saw Bones, also strapped down, watching them.

‘He’ll be fine,’ he said. ‘He’ll do what I tell him.’

Erlin gazed down at him and gave a tight little smile he very much did not
like. ‘Neither of you will cause any trouble.’ She turned aside and crooked
her finger. Aesop raised his head in time to see four Hoopers approaching. He
started to wonder if his earlier happiness had been a little premature. Then
Erlin reached down and began undoing his restraints. Once she had released his
hands, he began to free himself. While the Hoopers looked on, she walked over
and began to detach the restraints from Bones, too. Keech did not look at all
happy about this.

‘Where’s Bloc?’ Aesop asked.

‘Bloc is in a tank, and it looks likely he’ll come out of it alive,’ Keech
replied. ‘I’m confident he’ll be coming back to the Polity with me to answer
for his crimes.’ He glanced at Erlin and grimaced. ‘Old Captains permitting.’

‘He could answer for them here.’ Bones now sat up.

‘We leave him,’ Aesop said, studying his companion, though there was nothing
to see. A skull could wear no expression.

‘Why?’ asked Bones.

Before anyone else could reply, Erlin interjected, ‘There’s no need for
threats or for discussion.’ She turned to one of the Hoopers. ‘Forlam, you
have your instructions?’

Forlam nodded.

‘What are you going to do with us?’ Aesop hurriedly took off his last
restraints and removed himself from thetable. He then glanced round at the
other tables, most of whose occupants seemed to be Hoopers—there were just one
or two who might be successful resurrectees. He knew that many had gone into
tanks and that there had been many failures.

Erlin eyed Bones as he too stood up, then turned to Aesop. ‘You’ll be confined
in Bloc’s stateroom until some decision is made about you. If you attempt to
leave that room, Forlam will then follow his Captain’s instructions. What were
they, Forlam?’

Forlam smiled. It was not a nice smile. ‘Tear off their arms and legs and
chuck them over the side.’

As two of the Hoopers took Aesop and Bones by the arms and led them to the
door, Aesop experienced startlingly clear memories of the crimes committed by
himself and his partner before their reification. Bloc’s murder had been just
one of many—but no one here knew that for certain. Keech might have some
intimation, but as yet no proof. He and Bones were culpable of nothing they
had done while under Bloc’s control. If the Old Captains decided against them
being extradited under Keech’s custody, it was just possible they might
survive this. Then he realized all his hopes were based on a simple premise:
that, like Polity AIs, the Old Captains would consider them innocent of crimes
committed while under Bloc’s control. He glanced aside and tried to read the
expressions of those Hoopers close around him—probably men whose companions
had been killed by the hooder he himself had led into the encampment on
Mortuary Island. Only Forlam showed any sign of emotion, and what Aesop read
in his face was not at all reassuring.

* * * *

‘Who are you?’

The woman stumbling towards him he immediately identified as Olian Tay.

‘I have come to stop this,’ said Wade.

She eyed his APW, naturally coming to the wrong conclusion. That was a last
resort for him. He and Zephyr could resolve this between them.

‘But what are you stopping?’ she asked, as he moved past her.

Wade winced on experiencing a sudden doubt. He was not sure if he knew.

Out at sea, he had opened his internal hivelink via the runcible back to the
planet Hive, but had found no reassurance there, and no advice. He had sensed
only deep confusion, fear, anger, with an undertow of fractured and
contradictory instructions:

Destroy Zephyr—destroy yourself—flee—load to crystal—lie—live.

Faced with this coming from the mind from which he had earlier been copied,
Wade had become increasingly reluctant to face Zephyr, until at one point he
found himself just hanging motionless in the sky. He realized that the
conclusion to his and Zephyr’s long-running debate might be no resolution for
either of them. It was the sight of the submersible moving on ahead that had
finally jerked Wade into motion again. That was Janer, almost certainly, and
the man would have no reservations about using the weapon he carried. Arriving
at Olian’s and descending through the damaged roof, Wade had felt he might be
too late, even though he could still hear the mad mutter of Zephyr’s mind.
Stopping Janer had been necessary—the man just did not grasp what was at
stake, and would strike even though it might not be necessary.

The door into the vault room was open. Wade paused to one side of it and sent,
‘I cannot allow you to do this.’ But no reply returned over the ether. Wade
stepped round the door jamb, abruptly squatting and levelling his weapon.
Sprine was scattered all around inside the open vault. Zephyr stood there,
holding a pressure grenade certainly full of the virus—seemingly waiting for
something? Obviously Zephyr wanted to be dissuaded from its present disastrous
course. He opened his mind to the Golem sail, totally, and began transmitting
all that he knew, all he had recently learned. He replayed all the arguments
at high speed, created and then collapsed all the relevant logic structures,
laying out his final case. This could bring about their resolution, in this
moment of the sail’s crisis. The surge of information would overwhelm its
confused mind, and then it could do nothing but agree.

But the information he sent just seemed to drop into a black pit—and Wade
recognized despair. He understood then just what his other half awaited: the
enemy. Death. He increased the pressure on his weapon’s trigger, but found he
could not pull it back all the way, because then the irrevocable decision

would have been made. The pause lasted only microseconds—but an age in Golem
terms. Then Zephyr’s agonized cry filled the room, and the Golem sail fired
its particle cannon. The turquoise blast struck Wade in the chest, hammering
him back against the wall.

I’m going to die, he realized, I waited too long.

* * * *

On the planet Hive, up on its promontory, the building resembled a World War
II concrete pillbox, with horizontal windows gazing slit-eyed across the
lowlands. Beyond the bare and mounded earth surrounding it, which further lent
the appearance of a recently installed machine-gun post, lay dying algae
gathered in green and yellow drifts amidst the vines, wide-leafed rhubarbs and
cycads. Snairls, ranging from the size of a man’s head to creatures as large
as a sheep, grazed on this abundance. The air immediately around the building
seemed filled with smoke, but closer inspection revealed this to be clouds of
hornets, killing each other.

Physically infiltrating the ancient mind’s redoubt had been impossible at
first, so the young mind’s only means of access had been either by
conventional inter-hive radio or by intercepting and interpreting spillover
transmissions between individual hornets. The former means had slowly
degraded—the ancient mind’s communications becoming increasingly contradictory
and opaque—and the latter was swiftly following the same course. The old mind
was clearly fragmenting. But now that very fragmentation offered an
opportunity to actually get inside both the redoubt and, by intercepting
direct hornet-to-hornet transmissions, the ancient mind itself.

The six hornets did originally belong to the old mind, but the youngster had
isolated them, shutting off their radio communication with the rest of the
mind, then inside them installed transmitters tuned to his own mental coding,
but also linked to their original transmitters. Such a ploy could never work
on a guarded mind, for such minds constantly monitored their own function. The
six of them flew into the swarm gathered around the redoubt, and through their
faceted eyes the young mind observed hornets attacking each other in mid-air,
chewing in with mandibles or stinging each other to death. Now entering this
swarm, the youngster began to pick up straight-line neuro-radio transmissions
between hornets, and found that the mental coding of the old mind was
beginning to vary. The young mind identified six variations: five still very
close to the original, but one that was wildly astray. He lost four of his own
six hornets to attacking insects before confirming that the attackers all used
that disparate code. The old mind was now fully divided into two parts: one
finite and hostile, the other in the process of breaking into yet another
five. The surviving two spies finally entered the redoubt.

Inside it, paper nests grew like bracket fungi from the walls, layer upon
layer of them, shelf upon shelf. In here the battle was horribly intense and

the floor piled deep with dismembered hornet bodies. The young mind noticed
that the hostile hornets were all issuing from one particular conglomeration
of nests and, though they were the aggressors, they were losing because the
defending nests contained five times their population. But the place contained
not just paper nests and drifts of hornet corpses. Fluorescent nano-circuitry
adorned the walls, linked to various machines scattered here and in the
labyrinth of rooms beyond: furnaces, U-space transmitters, self-contained
robotic laboratories and manufactories.

The young mind lost another of its two remaining spies, chopped to pieces by
two attackers, that hornet’s vision fading as its severed head fell to the
crowded floor. The surviving one, settling on the curved cowling over a
manufacturing unit for hornet crystorage boxes, he now fully opened to the
surrounding neuro-radio traffic. Insane screaming fed through, along with a
viruslike mental program aiming for division, for partition. The youngster
swiftly realized this program was no new creation, but in fact one older than
the human race. Trying to hold his own sanity together, the young mind
attempted to withdraw, tried to shut down the terrifying link. Underneath the
screaming he detected a deep sadness—and a decision being made. From one of
the slitted windows, a communication laser swivelled on gimbals and began
firing. Also, an enclosed lens-shaped autofactory developed hot spots as
contained furnaces were deliberately overloaded. Paper nests began to burn.
The last com the young mind received from its spy in the bunker was the
feeling of mandibles closing between its thorax and its tail, and a wall of
flame falling towards it. Meanwhile, from other eyes at a distance, the young
mind watched smoke and flame belch from the redoubt.

The old mind had chosen death rather than dissolution.

* * * *

Wiping dust off his gun against his shirt, Janer tried to study its displays
even as he ran. He passed Olian Tay, who was leaning against a wall and gazing
back towards the vault room, raised a hand to her, then nearly fell flat on
his face as Zephyr’s particle-weapon fire lit up ahead of him. No time to
pause. He reached the vault room door and stepped through, aiming his gun at
Zephyr, looming upright with wings fully spread, turquoise flame blazing from
its eyes. He glimpsed Wade over to one side, pressed up against the wall and
burning. Then the fire suddenly ceased.

Janer pulled the trigger of his weapon; everything seeming to happen with
nightmare slowness.

Too slow.

The Golem creature could move just as fast as Wade, yet it chose not to.

Zephyr’s head was turned slightly towards Janer as the singularity generated,
encompassing the sail in a collapsing sphere. Then, a light as bright as the
sun, a wash of heat, and a blast that flung Janer back out into the corridor.
He was slammed against the wall and began to slide down it but, his body
already toughened by the Spatterjay virus, he remained conscious.

Why such a blast?

Then he realized: power supplies inside the Golem sail for itself and its
weapons. He was lucky the explosion had not taken out the whole building. He
lay there for a moment feeling dazed, then reached up tentatively to touch the
burns on his face, and to check if there was still any hair on his head.
Within the vault room he observed falling ash and gleaming fragments of
ceramal scattered across the floor. One distorted claw, which had obviously
been outside the sphere, now rested on a pile of charred sprine crystals. He
was still staring at that when some blackened object dragged itself slowly
around the door jamb.

‘I should not have been fast enough,’ Janer said. ‘It was Golem.’

Wade was missing everything from below his sternum, and his metal bones still
glowed at that severance point. His remaining syntheflesh was blackened to a
crisp, and fell off in smoking chunks as he moved. He paused, made some
clicking and buzzing sounds.

‘You—should—not – havebeen,’ Wade finally agreed, tiny embers glimmering in
the air before his mouth, his skeletal jaw making chewing motions.

‘Then why was I faster than a Golem?’

‘Zephyr—wanted – todie.’

‘Seemed reluctant to let you provide that service.’

‘Icould—notkill—me.’

Janer absorbed that and let it go. He realized he was still holding his
singun, which he pointed at Wade. ‘Do you want to live?’

‘I—haveto—thereis only—me.’

Janer supposed this was about as much sense as he was likely to get. He
holstered his weapon and heaved himself to his feet.

* * * *

21

Whelkus Titanicus:
this name applies to just one kind of deep-ocean-dwelling whelk, and should
not be confused with the adult forms of frog and hammer whelks which, though
large, do not grow to one tenth the size of this behemoth. Titanicus can weigh
more than a hundred tons and stand twenty metres high. The pregnant female of
this species gives birth to a brood of about a hundred young, and guards them
while they feed and grow in the less inimical island shallows. When the
youngsters reach a weight of about half a ton, and their shells harden, the
mother leads them gradually into the depths. Only 10 per cent survive the
journey down to the oceanic trenches. They there feed upon anything available,
but their main diet consists of giant filter worms rooted up from the bottom.
Virally infected as are most of the other local fauna, the large adults are
nearly invulnerable, and it is speculated that specimens of this whelk may be
even older than some sails. It is also possible that their survivability is
enhanced by either conscious or unconscious control of the viral fibres inside
them. This theory was propounded upon the discovery of a small population of
these creatures growing the internal digestive systems of herbivorous
heirodonts. They did this in a part of the Lamarck Trench recently denuded of
fauna by an underwater eruption yet burgeoning with kelp trees thriving on the
mineral output of that same eruption. But the adult Whelkus titanicus does not
get things all its own way, for it is itself prey to an equally titanic ocean
heirodont, and young adult whelks can even be broken open by the large adult
hammer whelks—

Captain Orbus walked shakily from the Tank Room and leant on the ship’s rail,
staring out across the nighted ocean. After a moment he took hold of what
remained of the manacle around his right wrist, pulled hard on it, squeezed
and twisted. With a dull crack the ceramal shattered and dropped clattering to
the deck. They had only managed to keep him restrained because he had not been
in his right mind. Foolish of them to think such flimsy restraints could hold
an Old Captain. But what now? Soon someone would notice he was gone and come
looking for him, probably with weapons, or with something a bit more potent
like Captains Ron, Ambel or Drum. Would he then fight? Would he seek his usual
release in violence?

Orbus shook his head, feeling tired and dried up inside. He realized something
in him had changed. He looked back upon his life—the long centuries of
sadistic brutality and the pointless cyclic nature of it all—and saw it for
what it was: a waste. Perhaps now he should end it, cash in his New Skind
banknotes for their equivalent weight in sprine and the oblivion that would
bring him.

No, no way.

Yes, his life had been a waste up until now. But it did not need to continue
that way.

‘Captain . . .’

Orbus looked round and recognized Silister and Davy-bronte further along the
deck from him. They both carried Batian weapons, and both looked scared.
Hearing pounding feet from behind, he glanced over that way and saw Forlam and
other Hoopers approaching, but slowly enough for Ambel and Drum, coming along
behind, to catch them up. He could fight now, then many of them would go over
the side to the stripped-fish locker before they brought him down. What havoc
and pain he could wreak.

‘What can I do for you?’ he asked.

‘You broke your restraints,’ said Silister.

‘Feeling a lot better now,’ said Orbus. ‘I ate big lice on the Prador ship and
they staved off the change, so I’m not going to hurt anyone.’

Davy-bronte snorted contemptuously, levelling his weapon at Orbus’s head. The
Captain stared at him for a long moment, then turned to the other two Old
Captains as they approached. He nodded towards the Tank Room.

‘The restraints in there won’t hold me. Where do you want me?’ he asked them.

‘Where would everyone be safe from you?’ asked Ambel, striding forwards.

Drum remained a few steps back, slapping a heavy iron club against the palm of
his hand.

‘I don’t reckon you’ve anything that could hold me on this ship. But, if you
like, I’ll walk straight back in there’—Orbus again nodded towards the Tank
Room—‘and Erlin can stick a nerve blocker on me, shutting down everything
below my neck.’

Ambel frowned. ‘Yes, that would seem a sensible course.’

‘But I’ll hurt no one if you let me remain free.’

Ambel stepped up close to Orbus and stared into his face. After a moment he
said, ‘Show me your tongue.’

Orbus stuck it out. The end of it was still hollow, and he could feel the hard
bits inside it where plug-cutting teeth had started growing. But the Intertox
and nutrients had worked quickly in him. After a moment he closed his mouth.

Ambel studied him for a long minute, then gave a sharp nod. ‘Find yourself an
empty cabin—there’s plenty available.’

Silister and Davy-bronte and the other gathered Hoopers looked on doubtfully.

Orbus smiled tiredly and turned back to the rail. ‘In a moment,’ he said.
‘I’ll take the night air for a while.’

* * * *

Like a swarm of golden bees, the drones and the armoured Prador were beginning
to disperse from around Vrell’s ship. This could only mean a strike was
imminent.

‘That’s one big mother,’ observed Thirteen dryly.

Vrost’s ship was now plainly visible above the planetary horizon: a vast grey
mass in the shape of a Prador’s carapace, but a shape losing definition under
additional blockish structures, engines, weapons arrays and other less easily
identifiable components. It was slowly turning and tilting, so its massive
coil-gun—like a city block of skyscrapers turned horizontal and lifted above
the main vessel on a giant curved arm—was all too visible. Sniper was
surprised at Vrost giving so clear a signal of intent, but doubtless the
Prador captain was now certain of making a kill. This close to the planet,
engaging the U-space drive would tear Vrell’s ship apart, and no other drive
would be fast enough to get it out of range. And his vessel now also
represented little danger to those on the planet below, since anything left of
it would burn up in atmosphere.

‘Let’s listen to what they’re saying,’ Sniper suggested. Cruising along ten
kilometres behind, he snooped into the uncoded communications between the two
Prador, and relayed it to the little drone.

‘Why have you ordered your troops back?’ the voice from the ship asked.

Vrost hesitated, perhaps wondering whether it was worth wasting energy on the
soon-to-be-dead, but his curiosity won out. ‘I have moved them back because I
do not wish them to get damaged.’

‘Coming to you as I have, I have demonstrated that I am no threat. Why should
I then be a danger to them?’

They were both playing games, with layers of bluff and counter-bluff. Vrost
and Vrell both knew the outcome of this encounter, and they both knew that the
other knew, but Vrost had to be wondering if Vrell had accepted the inevitable
and intended to go down fighting, or whether he had something else in mind.

‘You do represent a small threat to them,’ agreed Vrost. ‘But the shock wave
and flying debris will shortly be a greater danger to them.’

‘I do not understand,’ said that voice again—Vrell.

Sniper understood the reason for this pretence at ignorance, more than did
Vrost, and very much more than Vrell himself would be comfortable with. Sniper
could tell Vrost everything, which would immediately scupper Vrell’s plans.
But Sniper’s equally apportioned dislike and distrust of all Prador was
tempered by his rapport with the underdog. In this situation he felt on
Vrell’s side. Both of him.

Sniper interrupted. ‘Listen, shithead, very shortly Vrost will be cutting you
and your ship to pieces. It doesn’t matter what you do now, you are dead. Down
on the surface you managed to fend off some attacks, but only because Vrost
could not employ the full power of his weapons without taking out half the
planet. Up here he does not need to be so restrained.’

‘My name is not shithead,’ replied the voice.

‘Whatever,’ Sniper snapped. ‘You make a very clear target against the sky.’

A long pause ensued while the voice’s owner processed that.

On a private channel Thirteen asked, ‘Sniper, what are you up to?’

On the same channel Sniper replied, ‘Just reminding someone of something.’

‘Who is this?’ asked Vrost meanwhile.

‘Just an old Polity war drone who hasn’t lost his taste for turning Prador
into crab paste,’ Sniper replied. ‘I can’t tell you how it gladdens my heart
to see you two trying to kill each other.’

‘The state of your emulated emotions is not my concern.’

‘Bite me. Vrell, while you’re getting fried up here, why don’t you send out
that war drone of yours for a rematch against me? I definitely owe it at least
that. It doesn’t matter what you do now—you’re dead.’

‘I don’t get this,’ said Thirteen.

‘You will.’

Sniper wondered how long it would take for the underlying message to be
understood. Then he was answered when weapons turrets on Vrell’s ship launched
a swarm of black missiles. Many of them began exploding—quickly picked off by

Vrost’s defensive lasers. Sniper tracked the rest, then grinned inside when
their own drives ignited, turning them sharply towards the nearest of Vrost’s
outside forces. A particle beam ignited space with turquoise fire from Vrost’s
ship. It splashed against a hard-field before reaching its target, but on
Vrell’s ship an explosion blew wreckage into space, as the relevant field
projector overloaded. Then the coil-gun fired, but the projectile was
intercepted with a similar blast from the particle cannon on Vrell’s ship. A
wash of candent gas streamed past the smaller ship. The guards and drones were
meanwhile occupied in either dodging or shooting down those missiles.

More salvos launched from both ships. Again the coil-gun, again the
interception. EM explosions began to screw up Sniper’s reception, so he did
not track the one missile with an atomic warhead that detonated only a
kilometre from Vrell’s ship. The vessel tilted, some of its armour peeling
away in the blast, then it righted and continued firing. Vrost’s ship was now
accelerating. A nuke detonated on it, blasting a glowing cavity. Sniper
realized the Prador captain was positioning his ship where there was no chance
of any of his coil-gun missiles being deflected down towards the planet. Now
came a U-space signature, weirdly distorted. Endgame.

‘There,’ said Sniper to Thirteen.

Seeing Vrell’s war drone blasting out into space, Sniper accelerated.
Perfectly timed. The coil-gun began firing repeatedly. Four intercepted
projectiles turned vacuum to furnace air. Power low for the particle cannons,
the next was intercepted by hard-fields. A line of explosions cut down Vrell’s
ship as projectors exploded. The projectile impacted, substantially slowed,
but still slapped its target like some god’s hand. With fires burning inside
it, a huge chunk of the ship fell away.

‘He’s mine!’ Sniper sent to those of Vrost’s forces who had spotted Vrell’s
drone and were hitting it from all sides. ‘Vrost, pull them off!’

Just then, Vrost suddenly discovered more critical concerns. Again that
distorted U-space signature. Vrell’s ship juddered partially out of existence,
shedding tonnes of armour like potato peelings. Then, with a screaming sound
over every frequency, it flashed out of existence completely.

‘Fuck me,’ said Thirteen.

The ship reappeared a hundred kilometres closer to Vrost’s vessel, only it no
longer looked like a ship. Now it was a meteor-sized mass of glowing metal
travelling at tens of thousands of kilometres per hour. Vrost’s forces rapidly
lost interest in chasing the drone, which was now falling into atmosphere,
blackened and distorted and obviously without functional drives. Vrost himself
kept firing every weapon available at what remained of Vrell’s ship. Sniper

gave a salute to the hugely accelerated wreck, turned on his fusion drive, and
himself dropped into atmosphere. Long minutes later, he spread his tentacles
wide and came down on the burnt Prador drone like a hammer.

* * * *

Having routed control to a joystick and simpler console mounted in the conning
tower, Janer motored on the ocean’s surface under a starlit sky, only it was
not just stars that lit the heavens. There had been some massive explosions up
there, the glowing fallout from which was now dropping behind the horizon like
a false sunset. Janer supposed Vrell had finally met his end at the claws of
his fellow creature in orbit. He would find out eventually, but now he just
wanted to get back to the Sable Keech, which was visible ahead of him, and
there make use of the cabin and bed provided for him.

The big ship was slowing and turning, at the end of its journey, and had it
been necessary for him to go in manually Janer doubted he could manage it, but
the submersible possessed an automatic docking system. Before returning inside
to start that procedure, Janer scanned the nearby ocean. On the console, the
map showed him to be almost on top of the Little Flint, but he had yet to see
it. Then, a few hundred metres out, he spotted that dish of black stone
protruding from the ocean. This is what it had all been about: their voyage
here. He hoped Bloc was satisfied.

With the hatch closed, Janer took up the primary controls and submerged the
little vessel then, hoping he had got things right, he called up the docking
icon, selected it with a tap of his finger, and sat back. The sub immediately
dropped deeper and accelerated. Outside the water was dark, so he turned on
the lights, just in time to see a frog whelk tumbling past, perhaps dislodged
from the nearby flint. A few minutes later a massive wave of white water was
boiling past above him, and he glimpsed the Sable Keech’s hull. The sub turned
and rose, turned again and accelerated, then abruptly decelerated and veered.
This happened twice more. Janer realized that the sub’s automatics were having
problems compensating for the movement of the ship. On the third occasion a
warning flashed up on his screen: IRIS door closed. He hit the nearby icon to
open the iris and this time there was no deceleration. Suddenly the eye of the
shimmer-shield was before him, then he was through it, the sub dropping half a
metre with a shuddering crash. Clamps engaged, motors whined. He watched the
sub enclosure revolve around him as the vessel was turned to present its nose
to the iris, which was now drawing closed again.

Stepping out of the submersible, Janer looked around. It occurred to him that
he should present himself to Captain Ron, but he felt too tired. Anyway, there
was probably some signal on the bridge to tell the Captain that the sub had
returned. He left the enclosure, climbed the nearest ladder up to a mainmast
stairwell, cut through the seemingly unpopulated reification stateroom deck,
then continued up a mizzen stairwell to the crew’s quarters. On his way he saw
no one, and was grateful for that. It was with a feeling of relief that he
closed his cabin door behind him.

Janer collapsed on his bed, allowing himself to just experience that moment of
pure luxury—but something was niggling at his mind. He stood, pulled his
backpack from a cupboard, opened it and removed his stasis case. Hinging open
the hexagonal container, he observed two hornets ready in the transparent
reservoir. That figured. He groped in his pocket and found his hivelink,
stared at it for a moment, then returned it to his pocket. Not now—sleep
seemed so much more important.

* * * *

Taylor Bloc stood on his apartment balcony gazing out across Haldon, watching
the sun rise over the city. He blew on his delicate porcelain cup of tea and
took a sip, relishing its tobacco pungency. Imported all the way from Earth,
China tea was a luxury others would not appreciate as did he, but then his
tastes were somewhat more sophisticated. It was a pure thing, not some India
tea adulterated with one of a thousand popular additives, not base coffee
doped with stimulant enhancers. Bloc left such things to others, to the
normals who lived in their millions all around him working through their drear
dull lives. He shook his head and smiled, turning away from the sunrise just
as mathematical formulae, in a language he had only just come to know, began
sleeting down the sky behind the city. In some part of himself he knew this
was all wrong, but that part was frozen in horrified fascination as it
observed those elements of this scene it knew so very well.

Bloc walked back into his apartment, placed his cup down on a table whose top
was made of a polished slice of Prador carapace, and dropped into an armchair
beside it. He then picked up the spider thrall he had recently purchased. This
was the sort of thing that fascinated him: baroque technologies,
grotesqueries, the unusual. He supposed it almost inevitable that his
interests had led him to greater and greater involvement with the Cult of
Anubis Arisen. But thereby another of his needs was fulfilled: the acquisition
of wealth. It was pointless possessing such sophisticated tastes if one could
not gratify them. Bloc placed the thrall back down on the table underneath
whose surface a six-dimensional shape—following the strictures of the formulae
in the sky outside—was trying to turn itself inside out. He smiled again, his
foot passing through Calabi-Yau space as he turned to glance to his left. The
inversion, folding part of the room into a fifth dimension, impinged on him as
little as the formulae in the sky and the shape under the table. Instead it
was the two figures now standing in the room that caused him to gasp in shock.

‘How—?’

The one on the right, a mild-looking man dressed in a slightly rumpled
disposable suit, raised a short squat gun with a snout like a pepper pot. The
weapon thwacked, and something more than the force of the micropellets
entering Bloc’s face flung him up out of his seat and across the table. He lay
there quivering briefly, then quickly freezing up. The Calabi-Yau shape passed
over above him like an interdimensional bat.

Neurotoxin, thought one part of his mind. What the fuck? thought another.

‘Hi there,’ said the mild man, gazing down on him. ‘I’m Aesop, and my partner
here is called Bones.’

Bloc’s horror grew. Neither of them had bothered to cover their faces, and now
they had revealed their names to him. Both faces and names could of course be
false, but there was something else in their attitude. They were undoubtedly
here to kill him. Deep inside himself, that other part of him already knew
this, and it dreaded the how of it. That part now listened to well-remembered
words as Bones, a slim fair-haired youth, dragged him off the table and
deposited him in an antique rocking chair.

‘You do of course understand how very annoyed with you are certain parties?’
said Aesop, setting up a little tripod on the table on which in turn he
mounted an old-fashioned holocam.

Bloc tried to utter a name, could not even open his mouth. He could, however,
just move his eyes, and observed Bones opening a premillennial doctor’s bag.
These killers had style and panache but, even though he recognized this,
neither that thought nor the neurotoxin prevented his bowel from emptying when
Bones began taking out antique stainless steel pliers, forceps, scalpels,
electric bone saw and cauterizer.

The holocam now perfectly set up and operational, Aesop took out an anosmic
receptor and set that running. This device would continually sample molecules
from the air, so that whoever viewed this recording, probably in VR, would
miss nothing, not even the odours. Smelling the results of Bloc’s
incontinence, Aesop waved a hand under his nose. ‘Playing to your audience,
Bloc?’

Bloc managed to make a grunting sound, as the toxin was wearing off. Aesop
glanced at his partner, who immediately walked over to the balcony and drew
the doors closed, shutting out all sounds of the city beyond.

‘Nicely insulated apartment this. I had considered taking you elsewhere until
I studied the building specs. No one will hear you scream here and, of course,
my clients want to hear you scream. They want you to suffer a great deal,
Taylor Bloc. So, while that toxin wears off, I’ll tell you exactly what we are
going to do to you.’

Bloc screamed, his voice echoing off into unknown dimensions of a Calabi-Yau
shape stretched as taut as his own skin as Bones peeled that away. He howled
as they twisted out his nails and broke each of his finger joints, yet found
himself bewildered by formulae writhing through the air behind his tormentors.
Every aspect of his agony, every curve and angle of his surroundings, was
redolent with mathematical meaning. Every movement and every change generated
complex numbers. His skin represented in two dimensions the surface of space,
and Bones shoving a finger through it, a gravity well. The bone saw flung up
fragments of formulae that coalesced in the air, then spattered the floor as
blood and vomit. There was direction to the calculation, as there was
direction to Bloc’s torture. Both ended with the enveloping comfort of death,
and finally he sighed away into blackness.

Taylor Bloc stood on his apartment balcony gazing out across Haldon, watching
the sun rise over the city. He blew on his delicate porcelain cup of tea and
took a sip, relishing its tobacco pungency. Part of him, deep inside, began
screaming immediately.

No, not again . . .

Then, almost like a light being turned on, he woke trying to scream, but only
a hoarse cawing sound issued from his mouth. Thrashing from side to side, he
opened his eyes. The morning sunshine hurt, stabbing sharply into his head,
and tears began pouring from his eyes. Where were they? Where were his
killers? I escaped? But no, he did not escape—he died a painful undignified
death, screaming, then his death continued . . .

Aesop and Bones . . . I killed them and now they serve me. Only dreams.

The morning sunshine was glaring through the windows. Bloc felt terrible. His
body felt as if it had been beaten from head to foot, his teeth ached, he was
cold, and his skin felt so sensitive that every small touch to it was almost a
pain.

Then, he suddenly realized: I feel.

A deep shiver of awe ran through him, and he turned his head from side to
side, locating himself on one of the restraint tables. He was not restrained,
so he withdrew a hand from under the heat-sheet covering him—the thin
insulating monomer snaking over his skin in an avalanche of sensation—and held
it up before his face. It was baby pink, and as soft. The nails were just
small crescents at the quick of each finger.

I’m alive.

With slow careful movements Bloc sat upright, the sheet sliding down his
chest. It was almost too much—too much feeling for him to process. He groaned
and in an instant Erlin was standing next to him, watching him with careful
contempt.

‘You’ll get no nerve-conflict with your cybermotors,’ she said.

‘Keech . . .’ he managed.

‘Keech was augmented and remained so after his resurrection—that’s where his
problems came from. You, however, are not augmented in any way.’

He turned to look at her, and while doing so tried to call up routines and
diagnostics, access his control unit, open the channels to Aesop and Bones.
Nothing.

‘What have . . . you done?’ It was a strange experience, breathing and
speaking, and trying to arrange the two so they did not conflict.

‘When you downloaded from crystal to your organic brain and it became plain
you were going to come out of the tank alive, I used an autodoc on you. It
pulled every single power supply you contained, and I also used the doc to
remove this.’ She held up something: a grey box that sat easily in the palm of
her hand, with a hexagonal box affixed to the side of it, linked by a ring of
sealed optics. Bloc recognized his memplant and the attached control unit.

‘What gives you the right to do that?’ he hissed. He was just a living man
now.

‘The right?’ she asked, her voice incredulous. She shook her head, pulled a
comlink from her belt and spoke into it. ‘You wanted to know—well, he’s awake
now.’

From the link Ron’s voice replied, ‘Perfect timing.’

As Erlin returned the link to her belt, Forlam came over. He tossed a
disposable coverall in Bloc’s lap. ‘Get dressed.’

‘You can’t give me orders. This is my ship. You are under my command; your
Captain is employed by me.’

Forlam shrugged. ‘Naked or otherwise—don’t bother me.’

What are they going to do?

Bloc slid the heat-sheet all the way off him and stared down at his body. He
looked perfect: no scars, just pink skin. His pubic hair was just a shadow
above his genitals, and while staring at what Bones had once cut from him—an
event all too clear in his mind after repetition—he felt a sudden surge of
sexual feeling. He dressed, quickly, the coverall cold and textured against
his aching skin. Finally clothed, he looked over to Erlin again.

‘I did this,’ he said. ‘It was because of me this ship was built. It is
because of me that reifications will live. I own this ship and it is under my
command.’

Erlin shook her head. ‘Let me bring you up to date and back to reality.
Windcheater has imposed a large fine for the use of this ship’s engines, which
in turn has caused a cost overrun on this voyage. Apparently, by your original
agreement, Lineworld Developments now own this ship—not that it will profit
them much.’

Bloc felt a tightness in his throat, and his eyes were watering again. Then a
hand that felt as if made of rock closed on his biceps. Forlam marched him
forwards.

‘You can’t do this!’ Bloc found it even hurt to shout. ‘I created all this! I
did this! I am bringing my people to the Little Flint!’

Walking behind them, Erlin continued, ‘Most of your people are either in tanks
or have shut themselves down. They don’t much like the odds, since successful
resurrections are only one in seven thus far. Many of them are likely to end
up like Bones, and the true cultists among them are angry at what you have
brought them to.’

Bloc fell silent then, and allowed Forlam to lead him out on deck. They might
think they had won, but they did not know him well enough. They would pay for

this. How he would make them pay.

* * * *

It was a long fall to the bottom and, heavy now, the giant whelk had landed
hard. She gazed up at the shapes hovering on the ocean surface and felt an
immediate protective fear. Large predators up there ready to attack her? She
needed to get back to shallows where she could protect the mass inside her,
and where food creatures were small enough to easily subdue. She began
dragging herself along the bottom, heading instinctively upslope to shallower
waters. Momentarily she felt a strange disquiet. She vaguely recalled there
had been an easier way of travelling than this, and something important she
had to do. But that thought faded under the exigencies of the present.

The slope ahead was scattered with broken shells and black rhinoworm bones.
Wherever she disturbed the bottom, white chalky clouds gusted up around her.
This was good, so she deliberately stirred up more for concealment. At one
point she heaved herself over an outcrop of dark rock, which splintered into
sharp fiat flakes under her grip. The higher she got, the steeper became the
gradient and the more such outcrops she encountered. On one of them she
encountered a flock of hammer whelks, and instantly began snatching them up to
smash their shells against the dark stone and chomp them down. She devoured
half of them before the rest slid out of reach, but did not pursue. Higher
still, and frog whelks diverged from her path, bounding downhill in slow
motion.

There were more leeches evident here, and any that came close she snatched up
and consumed. While thus engaged she spotted a line trailing from one of her
tentacles, which stirred some memory but not enough to bring it into focus. In
irritation she caught the line with another tentacle and tried to tear it
free. The fact that this hurt only made her angrier. Eventually she succeeded
in tearing the hook from her flesh, then watched the discarded tangle drift
off and sink from view. There was some emotion then—some feeling of loss—but
she resolutely turned away.

Now only hard dark flint lay before her—a cliff rising steeply from the slope.
She hesitated as another vague memory hinted that this might not lead to
island shallows, but instinct drove her on. She climbed, finding plenty of
easy tentacle holds on chalky nodules or in dark crevices. If this turned out
not to be the kind of place she wanted, then she would move on—her drive to do
so was imperative.

* * * *

Drawn out rattling crashes jerked Janer from uneasy slumber.

Anchor chains.

He sat upright and looked around blearily. Stumbling from his bed he then
collected clean clothing from his pack and headed for the showers. Upon his
return he stared at the stasis case still exposed in the top of his pack, took
it out, hinged it open and pressed his fingertip to the touch-plate beside the
reservoir. This opened, releasing two hornets into the air. Inured to the
creatures now, he ignored their angry buzzing while pulling their carry case
from his ash-stained trousers. Once it was in place on his shoulder the
hornets landed beside it and crawled inside. Janer placed the hivelink in his
ear-lobe.

‘The ancient hive mind is dead,’ the hive mind told him, then demanded, ‘What
is happening here?’

‘I would guess the Sable Keech has just anchored by the Little Flint,’ Janer
replied.

‘Tell me what has happened while I have been out of contact.’

Janer considered the events of the voyage past, and knew he would be talking
for quite some time. He also considered simply putting the hivelink back in
his pocket, but then with a sigh stepped out of his cabin and began to relate
the story. By the time he was halfway up a stairwell accessing the main deck,
the hive mind interrupted to inform him, ‘Vrell’s ship has been destroyed and
the other Prador ship is now departing. The Warden has now also informed me of
the events at Olian Tay’s bank.’

Janer paused and peered at the two hornets. ‘Did you want me to tell this or
not?’

‘Please proceed.’

‘Oh, and knowing the events at Olian’s you have of course authorized my
bonus?’

‘Proceed with the story.’

‘Okay, but I’ll be checking that later.’ Janer continued upwards. ‘Just as it
seemed we might be getting things under control, Vrell moved his father’s ship
right up underneath us . . .’

The sun beaming on the deck, Janer observed that the anchors were indeed
lowered but, by the noise of the chains being fed in and out of their lockers
and by the intermittent sounds coming from the engines, he guessed the ship’s
position was being carefully adjusted. He glanced over the rail and saw they
were in fact right next to the Little Flint—that place made holy by Sable
Keech.

The hive mind once again interrupted his monologue. ‘Windcheater warned of
further punitive costs should the Little Flint be damaged in any way.’

‘He probably hoped they would crash into it then,’ Janer muttered.

‘Now, from your point of view, tell me what happened when you reached
Olian‘s.’

Janer pointed along the deck to the crowd of Hoopers and reifications gathered
amidships. ‘You’ll have to wait. Others will want to hear this.’

Keech had once told Janer that, to his recollection, his time here on the
Little Flint had been no religious experience. Instead he’d had visions of
some very human devils, tried to survive, then escaped from here to end up in
a makeshift tank built by Janer, whilst Erlin had performed the midwife’s task
of delivering Keech into a new life.

Keech now stood back from the main crowd with Ron and Erlin. Janer approached
them.

‘What’s happening?’ Janer asked them.

‘This is what this voyage was all about, apparently,’ said Keech.

Erlin interjected, looking angry, ‘Those reifs still standing want to see the
place—along with seven others who’ve survived the resurrection process.’

Ron turned and peered at the hornets on Janer’s shoulder. ‘That sail? Isis
Wade?’ he asked him.

‘First I’ll have to tell you who they were,’ said Janer. He ignored the
harrumph of protest from the hive mind and filled them in on that story,
before proceeding to its ultimate outcome.

‘Kill Death?’ Shaking his head, Ron tapped his temple. ‘That sail was all at
sea without sails . . .’

‘But Isis Wade has survived, I gather,’ said Erlin. ‘I’m glad about that.’

Ron took out his comlink and announced, ‘All right boys; let it go.’

The deck began thrumming from the vibration of massive hydraulics, and Janer
wondered for a moment what exactly was happening. He saw the nearby rail
moving away from him, and the crowd back away from it as the movable section
of the ship’s hull began to fold down towards the sea, extending down with it
the collapsible stair from under the main deck. Placing his comlink back into
his belt Ron glanced round to where Forlam was escorting Bloc along the deck.

‘What are you going to do with him?’ Janer asked, expecting something nasty.

Ron merely shrugged, and gestured towards Keech.

Keech explained, ‘He gets to walk on the Little Flint just this once, then I
take him back to the Polity. Windcheater decided it would be better that
way—for good relations.’

‘You’re not going to throw him in for a swim, then?’

‘It would seem not.’ Ron looked disgruntled.

The hull section slapped down onto the sea beside the Little Flint, the stair
from the main deck now fully extended. Hoopers scrambled down this to push out
walkways leading onto that lonely piece of stone. After securing these, the
Hoopers returned, and then the seven resurrectees walked down.

‘I don’t like this,’ said Keech, moving up beside Ron.

‘Seems only fair to let him set foot on the place,’ replied the Captain. ‘Why
are you worried? You get him afterwards.’

‘Still . . .’ Keech looked round as Bloc finally approached.

Now, Janer spotted Captains Drum and Ambel stepping out from the nearby
mainmast stairwell, propelling Aesop and Bones before them. When the four of
them reached the edge of the ship, Ambel gazed over to eye his own ship, still
trailing on its tow rope behind the Sable Keech.

‘Not so low in the water, now,’ he observed, glancing towards Ron.

The other Captain nodded, then, thumbing its volume down, held his comlink up
against his ear.

‘I did this, I brought them here. I brought them here to the Little Flint!’
announced Bloc abruptly, as if that somehow gave him power in this situation.

The other seven resurrectees seemed bemused, and perhaps slightly
disappointed. After wandering around on the surface of the Flint for a short
time, they were already returning. Still-mobile reifications were now going
down for a look around, too, some of them wearing the distinctive dress of
Kladites. A few Hoopers joined them.

‘The Little Flint,’ said Bloc, triumphantly.

Janer eyed Ron, who was now muttering into his comlink. He went up to stand
beside the Captain, but only in time to see Ron thumb the link off.

‘Y’know,’ said the Captain, ‘Convocation didn’t agree with Windcheater.’

‘Ron, what are you—?’

‘Everybody get off there; we ain’t got all day!’ Ron bellowed, interrupting
him. He turned to Bloc. ‘I guess it’s all right for you to go down for a
look.’ Indicating Aesop and Bones he added, ‘Those two as well.’

* * * *

Bloc placed his foot down on the Little Flint. He could feel it through the
sole of his slipper. With all the obstacles they had thrown in his path, he
had yet achieved this—no matter what they might think of him. He stooped down
to touch the smooth stone, closed his eyes and absorbed the sensation.
Standing up again, he glanced at Aesop and Bones, who had wandered off to the
other side of Flint. They were conversing in low voices, and it seemed that,
despite them having once been under his control, they now found themselves in
the same straits as himself. He would make an alliance here. He straightened
up and approached them.

‘Aesop,’ he said, ‘Bones.’

‘Bloc,’ replied Aesop. Bones just licked out his metallic tongue.

‘We’re even now. You two tortured me to death, and I killed you and made you
serve me. Perhaps now we should put our relationship on a financial footing.’

Bones emitted only a hissing titter.

Aesop remarked, ‘Bones, even without benefit of flesh, is capable of
expressing his amusement better than I can. Tell me, Bloc, what do you
suggest?’

Bloc glanced over his shoulder to check the Old Captains and the others were
still back by the walkways. He did not know why they had come down to the foot
of the stair. Did they expect him to try to escape?

‘We have to retake the Sable Keech, More reifications will want to make this
voyage here. I can offer you a percentage of the profits.’

As Aesop made a harsh hacking sound, Bloc realized the reif was trying to
laugh.

‘Oh Taylor Bloc,’ he eventually said, ‘and how do you think we would fare
against three Old Captains? Or against reifications who now hate you because
you’ve brought them here to final death? Or against the Hoopers—and against
Sable Keech?’

‘There is always a way.’

‘It’s over, Bloc. You wanted to come here to the Little Flint, because it was
your mission, your calling, your destiny ... whatever. So enjoy it—and
remember it until that moment they wipe your mind.’

Bloc turned away to study the Old Captains standing on the stairway, along
with Erlin, Janer and Keech.

‘Anyway,’ continued Aesop from behind him, ‘you’re all alive again, and my,
don’t you look pink. We might as well have ourselves some fun here, as it’ll
make no difference to the sentence we receive back in the Polity. What do you
think, Bones?’

The snicking sound as Bones extruded the blades from his finger ends was all
too audible. Bloc turned, shuddering with horror at the memory of sharp blades
cutting into his former flesh. He tried to back away, but Aesop’s decaying
hand closed firmly on the front of his coverall.

‘No no . . . You don’t understand,’ he stammered.

‘Too late now,’ hissed Aesop.

Bloc heard a
towards him.
had not seen
dinner-plate
Flint.

shout from behind, and glanced back to see Sable Keech running
It was too late. Too late for all three of them. The other two
the huge iridescent shell rising behind them, nor the
eye, nor the enormous tentacles now reaching across the Little

* * * *

Sniper closed his own tentacles around the Prador drone and began decelerating
before they both burnt up on reentry. He gripped tightly and kept his weapons

systems online, just in case. They descended in a long arc that took them out
of night into twilight, then towards daylight. As Sniper brought the drone
down on an atoll just catching the rays of the morning sun, he once again
opened communication with the Warden.

‘What are you doing?’ Thirteen asked meanwhile, detaching itself from Sniper’s
armour and swinging in a circuit around the Prador war drone.

‘Repaying a favour.’

‘And what was so funny earlier?’ asked the little drone.

‘You’ve not figured it out?’

‘Knowing your humour, I suspect you somehow knew what Vrell intended to do to
Vrost’s ship. But how did you know?’

‘It wasn’t that,’ the old drone replied. ‘Vrost’s ship is probably very badly
damaged, but not enough to leave it unable to jump. I’d guess he’s now
recalling all his forces in preparation to pull out of the system.’

Sniper then concentrated on scanning the Prador drone. Its missile store was
thoroughly depleted and its power so low it could not block his scans. Quite
possibly the flash-frozen Prador brain inside there had been fried. Sniper
began to go to work on the armour, worming his tentacles in through the
weapons ports and connecting to some internal systems.

‘So?’ asked Thirteen, settling on his tail on top of the Prador drone.

‘Was it sufficiently damaged for most of Vrost’s security protocols to be
knocked offline, do you think?’ Sniper asked.

Sniper found the required system, short-circuited it, then injected power down
one of his tentacles. A loud crump ensued as a triangular hatch opened in the
drone’s side and slowly hinged down, exposing the tightly packed components
inside. Sniper noted the captive’s remaining claw moving weakly, as if the
drone was trying to reach up and close the hatch again.

‘Why is that relevant?’ asked the little drone.

‘Tell me, Thirteen, don’t you think Vrell has received rather shoddy treatment
from his own kind?’

‘This is how Prador generally treat each other. How they ever managed to
organize a civilization beats me.’

‘But who do you think is the better between Vrost and Vrell?’

‘Neither; they’re both monstrous.’

‘Then, in conflict, which of them would you prefer to win?’

‘Neither, if possible.’

‘Please just answer.’

‘As the Warden would put it, the one who causes the least collateral damage to
Polity citizens.’

‘What about internal conflict leading to a weakening of the Third Kingdom?
Surely this would be a good thing for the Polity?’

‘I guess so.’

Sniper transmitted the latest bit of data he had acquired. Thirteen shut down
for a moment to digest it.

With cables and various components hanging about him like fruit-laden vines.
Sniper finally found the main power conduits from the Prador drone’s
batteries. Only a trickle of current was getting through and, tracking back,
Sniper found that the cables used to top up the batteries from the fusion
reactor were severed, as were the cables providing a direct feed from the
reactor into the drone’s systems. He cut out some less essential S-con cables
and used them to replace those necessary ones, then withdrew. With a cycling

whine the drone began to charge up to power again. Eventually it spoke.

‘You will get nothing from me,’ announced the Prador war drone that was called
Vrell.

‘You don’t have any information I want, anyway. I know about your other self’s
viral infection and what that infection caused, down to the last detail. I
also know about the King’s guard, and the orders you were given, and why.’

The Prador drone now lifted slightly, testing its AG. Sniper backed away and
observed it drawing inside itself the components and cables he had pulled out.
The drone’s self-repair mechanisms, now under power, were taking over. The
hatch closed, but the drone could not yet block any scan, so urgently was it
engaged in diverting power to those batteries and accumulators mainly
concerned with its energy weapons.

‘Then what do you want?’ it asked.

‘To repay a favour—to save you.’

‘Why?’

‘Why didn’t you let me fly into your master’s defences?’ Sniper countered.

‘Because I was not ordered to.’

‘Then the same answer will do. But tell me, what are your orders now?’

The drone paused, unable to readily supply an answer. It lifted higher into
the air.

Sniper suggested, ‘Your final order should have resulted in your destruction,
so I doubt there are any further orders for you to follow.’

‘I have no orders. What do I do?’

‘Whatever you want,’ Sniper replied.

The Prador drone dropped back down onto the stone surface. Sniper noted how it
had reduced the power feed to its weapons and was now concentrating on
self-repair. While it was mulling over its present circumstances, Thirteen
came back online, having finished studying the data.

‘I see,’ the little drone said. ‘Only one Vrell was aboard—this drone.’

‘Exactly.’

‘Shouldn’t you tell the Warden?’

‘Probably, but I’m not going to.’

* * * *

A snaking tentacle looped around Bones and crushed him like a handful of
straws, then discarded him. Aesop had Bloc down on the stone and was
pummelling him. It seemed the reif had still not seen what was looming behind.
Bloc had seen it, though. He was yelling incoherently and, under the
onslaught, trying to crawl towards the walkways. The monstrous whelk finally
heaved itself up onto the Little Flint’s rim, as if it was reluctant to emerge
fully from the sea.

Erlin felt an almost drunken hilarity inside her. Ambel rested a hand on her
shoulder.

‘Don’t worry,’ he said. Then, with Janer and the other Captains, he took off
after Keech.

Reaching the two combatants, Keech caught Aesop hard with a kick under the
stomach that lifted him off Bloc, then he drew and aimed a pulse gun. Ron
reached them next, just in time for a tentacle to slam him down against the
stone. Another tentacle flicked and Drum arced back through the air to land
with a crash on the ship’s stair. Erlin considered it a lucky fall—he could
have gone into the sea—but Drum seemed in no hurry to get up again. Then she
realized that, without thinking, she had moved right out onto one of the

walkways.

Keech meanwhile hauled Bloc upright and began dragging him back towards the
ship. As a tentacle poised over him, he turned and fired a constant stream of
shots into it. The tentacle was snatched away, feeling the heat. Keech tossed
Bloc onto the walkway adjacent to the one Erlin occupied, and she watched the
newly alive man scramble back towards the ship. Ambel and Janer were now
intent on freeing Ron, and the huge combined strength of the Old Captains was
beginning to tell. But there were more tentacles to deal with; one snaked out
to enfold Aesop and raise him high. As it flicked down again, Erlin flinched
at the heavy thud against the side of the ship, and glimpsed Aesop stuck there
for a moment before dropping into the sea. Looking down, she realized she now
stood upon the Little Flint itself.

What the hell am I doing? Stupid question.

The single dinner-plate eye turned towards her, and the giant whelk rose up,
exposing its clacking beak and extending its corkscrew tongue. It recognized
her—she knew—and thus focused on her did not notice Janer step back and aim a
weapon along the length of tentacle gripping Captain Ron. With a thunderclap,
that length of that tentacle disappeared, then as suddenly reappeared in a
confetti of white gobbets. The whelk screamed and slammed itself down again.
Finally breaking free, Ron heaved himself upright and, leaning on Ambel,
stumbled towards the walkways. For a moment the whelk hesitated, thrashing its
tentacle stump against the stone, its eye turning to the sea then back towards
Erlin, before tentatively stretching another tentacle towards her. Ambel and
Ron reached the adjacent walkway, where Ambel paused as Janer moved past him
and began helping Ron up the stair.

‘Feeling mortal yet?’ Ambel asked her.

Suddenly Erlin’s body
boundary of oblivion,
how easy would it be?
stripped-fish. If the
and ran.

was drenched in cold sweat. Yes, she could walk on the
but the moment she stepped over it . . . nothing. And
If she ended up in the ocean, she could become a
whelk held onto her it would eat her alive. She turned

‘Get this fucking ramp up!’ Ron bellowed into his comlink.

The ramp stair was vibrating underneath Erlin as the tentacle smashed through
the walkway behind her. Then the stair was collapsing even as she scrambled up
it. Then it was folding back underneath the main deck, as she leapt the gap up
onto the planking.

‘Aargh, that smarts,’ said Drum, holding his quite obviously broken arms away
from his body. He had put them out ahead of him to break his fall—and they
had. Erlin supposed she would soon be using one of her Hooper programs in an
autodoc.

‘Was that all part of some plan?’ Janer asked Ron, still holding his gun as he
peered over the rail.

Straight-faced, Ron replied, ‘Not about that bugger.’ He glanced over to where
Keech had Bloc kneeling so as to face a cabin wall, the pulse gun pressed into
the back of his neck. ‘We reckoned those other two would do for him.’

Erlin wondered about that. She knew this ship had the facility to detect
something the size of that whelk moving about below. And she remembered Ron’s
furtive use of his comlink. The problem was, being an Old Captain, he’d had
plenty of time to practise lying, so she would probably never know for sure.

‘Hooper justice,’ stated Janer.

‘Yeah,’ said Ron, then called over to Keech, ‘Why? Why save him?’

Keech looked round. ‘I adhere to the laws I enforce.’

‘You weren’t so pernickity with Jay Hoop’s gang,’ Ron replied.

Keech grimaced, perhaps remembering his long and bloody pursuit of that gang.
He said, ‘Sentence was already passed on them in their absence. It was death
in every case.’

Erlin did not listen to Ron’s reply to that. The giant whelk was now wholly
occupying the Little Flint, and she thought it still far too close. That
single great eye remained focused on her and occasionally blinked. She
wondered if she would have to leave Spatterjay to ever be free of pursuit by
this monster.

‘Not the right place for it, you see.’ Ambel pointed. ‘Needs island shallows
to raise its young.’

Now, almost with disinterest, the whelk turned its eye away from Erlin and,
sliding over the other edge of the Flint, it dropped titanically into the
sea—and was gone.

* * * *

Aesop made no attempt to swim, his body being so weighed down with internal
hardware. Besides, his right arm was shattered, along with many other bones in
his body.

Boxies came first, following the trail of balm he was leaving behind as he
sank, then swinging round him in a cubic crowd. Soon they were darting in to
snatch away loose flesh from his ruptured arm, and from where other bones
protruded.

WARN: CELLULAR REPAIR REQ. SHUTTING BALM FLOW AB32—46, TORSO 65—70, LT (BOTH)
71—74 -

Yeah, right.

Aesop shut off all the error messages, which were irrelevant now that the
leeches were approaching.

The first one, easily the size of a human leg, crunched into his midriff.
Then, in a cloud of balm, it rolled away trailing two metres of carefully
preserved intestine. Next a whole shoal of its arm-sized fellows began
attaching and writhing round him until he could see nothing but feeding
leeches. As this shoal began at last to thin out, he held up one hand stripped
of flesh—all gleaming bone and nodular joint motors—and then observed the
rapidly approaching bottom. He landed with a crump on a steep slope, and
tumbled down it in a cloud of silt.

Eventually coming to rest against an outcrop of flint, he looked down at his
ravaged body. Leeches writhed between his ribs. He considered pulling them
out, but did not see the point. Others would come to finish the job, and he
would rather sooner than later that the point be reached where there was no
flesh on him to attract them. Standing up, he began making his way round the
slope that ascended to the Little Flint. At one point he paused, looking up,
and watched the Sable Keech depart. By the time he found what remained of
Bones, he was himself as skeletal as his companion had been. Bones, however,
was now just a splintered ribcage with neck vertebrae and skull still attached
to it.

Aesop picked him up. Now, where to go? He had no idea where the nearest shore
might lie, and his power supply might give out before they reached it. This
was, all things considered, the best he could hope for in the circumstances.
At least he had a chance . . .

* * * *

There were fires aboard Vrost’s ship. From a distance they looked like small
blazes on a floating island, but closer observation showed they burned at the
bottom of huge chasms sliced into the very structure of the leviathan vessel.
The coil-gun now tilted down against the hull, some missile or massive
fragment of Vrell’s vessel having cut through its supporting structure.
Exposed girders glowed red, radiating into space. The ship turned as it fell
away from Spatterjay, presenting its less damaged flank to the approaching
swarm. Hundreds of triangular ports already stood open, into which the war
drones zipped like bees returning to the hive. The com traffic was intense,
since many safety and security protocols had been overridden to get all the
troops back aboard and the ship safely away. Besides smoke from the fires
wreathing the vessel, emissions of radioactive gas from fusion engines
deliberately burning dirty, their flames shading from white to orange, helped
provide it with further cover. Vrost did not want to allow the Warden time or
opportunity to scan through damaged screening.

The Prador—designated by its armour’s CPU as Cverl—had managed to ascertain
its destination, even though its com-system had been damaged back on the
planet, and it could apparently only send base code to the others. Taking its
place in a swirling galaxy of golden-armoured individuals, it fell into line
as they descended towards a port. When only two of its fellows were between
itself and the opening, it got its first glimpse inside the craft and saw the
armoured Prador preceding it land hard on the floor plates as the ship’s
gravity dragged it down. The long chamber lying beyond was crowded with others
of its kind, since they would not be moving on further into the ship until the
atmosphere door could be closed and air pressure restored. Air, of course, was
vital, being the required fluid medium.

When its turn came, the Prador designated Cverl landed neatly, countering with
its armour’s AG and then scrambling on into the crowd. Five more came down
behind it, then the outer door began to draw closed. With the slow return of
atmosphere, the earlier silence was replaced by the incredible racket of
heavily armoured Prador crashing around the metal floor.

Such a closely packed crowd was perfect. Only one thing more was required.

Ah...

Doors all along each side of the chamber began to open, and the armoured
Prador started moving off to be about their assigned tasks. Cverl’s own
assignment was to collect a plasma torch and take it to a certain location to
help clear wreckage. Vrell, now wearing that Prador’s armour, crushed the
wedge-shaped container he held in his claw, releasing the replicating nanite
he had specially adjusted to destroy the nervous systems of Prador with a
particular genetic code . . . like all these around him. Ostensibly about to
proceed where he had been directed, he paused as a scream issued over com.
Glancing back, he saw one armoured Prador collapse down on its belly, while
another shot off on AG to crash straight into the ceiling.

Surprisingly fast. . .

Sighing with satisfaction, Vrell rechecked the ship’s map in his armour’s CPU,
and turned to head for Vrost’s sanctum.

* * * *

Epilogue

The Warden viewed the recent report with some interest. It seemed Oboron had
been bombarding the Polity with queries and threats for some time now.
Apparently Vrost had broken his contact with the Third Kingdom as he took his
ship out of the Spatterjay system, and had not been in communication since.
The information Sniper had gathered was just part of the story. Obviously,
like Oboron and all his kin, Vrell had been changed by the Spatterjay virus.
But this report now put the final touch to the story.

‘The real Vrell was not aboard his father’s ship when it destructed,’ the AI
sent. ‘He in fact boarded Vrost’s ship in the guise of a King’s guard.’

‘Ding dong. Correct answer and zero points for effort.’

‘What are you doing down there, Sniper?’

‘Just introducing someone to an adapted version of “attitude”,’ the old drone
replied.

‘Sniper, I have one of my sat-eyes poised directly above you, and there is
currently no cloud cover, so there is no point in you being disingenuous.
Thirteen, if you would allow me visual access?’

After a delay, presumably during which the little drone and the old drone had
some discussion or argument, the link established and the Warden gazed from
Thirteen’s eyes.

‘Meet Vrell,’ said Sniper, laconically.

The old drone and the Prador war drone were now cruising slowly above the
ocean. Both of them were battered and scorched.

‘What do you intend to do with your prisoner?’ the AI asked.

‘I just recruited him,’ replied Sniper. ‘You got a job for him?’

‘I doubt a Prador war drone would best serve the interests of the Polity.’

‘Oh, they ain’t so different really. Scrap a bit of the conditioning, wipe
standing orders, and in goes “attitude”—I think you’ll find him useful.’

‘And it has itself agreed to this?’

‘Not really, but I established a programming link while I was repairing him.’

‘Please route me through to that drone directly.’

As Sniper obliged, the Warden paused before asking, ‘Vrell, do you wish to
serve the Polity?’

‘Yeah, fucking right!’

‘And how best do you think you might serve the Polity?’

‘Give me something to destroy!’

‘Oops,’ said Sniper, quickly breaking communication.

In its silicon heart the Warden sighed—and it would have shaken its head had
it possessed one. The AI then turned its attention to one of its subminds.
SM2, the metre-long iron turbot, was again working as a vending tray in the
concourse of the Coram base, but this time at the Warden’s behest.

* * * *

Janer took his drink from the distinctly fishy floating tray, took a cautious
sip, then eyed the tray as it drifted over to serve the sofa opposite.

Taking her own drink, Erlin asked, ‘So what are your plans?’

‘We will return to Hive,’ said Isis Wade, who was seated on the sofa beside
Janer. ‘I am now the singular owner of some property there.’

Wade was now fully restored, in a physical sense, though there now seemed to
Erlin a lack of the former surety in his speech. But it was open to conjecture
whether that resulted from deliberate emulation or some more deep-rooted
cause.

‘But why are you going?’ Erlin directed the question at Janer.

‘I’ve been there before a couple of times, but only visited part of it, so
there’s a whole world still to see. You know,’ Janer closed his free hand into
a fist and bumped it against his temple, ‘gotta keep busy.’

Erlin responded with a measured nod—indeed, how well she knew that.

‘Shut the fuck up,’ Janer muttered to the carry case affixed on his shoulder.

Erlin grinned, almost able to guess what the hive mind was saying to
him—probably some sarcastic comment about Janer’s ‘busy-ness’. She then
glanced beyond him towards a commotion on the other side of the concourse.
‘Here they come.’

Janer and Wade turned simultaneously.

Even though the concourse was not particularly crowded, the people occupying
it moved sharply out of the approaching party’s way. Erlin then noticed some
of the Polity citizens groping in pockets for their holocams. Their
fascination was understandable, as four Old Captains together in one place was
not a common sight. It was certainly an impressive one.

Ambel, Ron, Drum and Orbus—they strolled along with leisurely power, appearing
utterly dominant, as if they could rip this moon base apart with their bare
hands. Forlam, not yet having attained such great age, just looked dangerous
and edgy alongside them. Crewman Drooble still bore the smiling expression of
the mildly demented. Keech alone seemed utterly normal and human amidst them,
while his prisoner, Bloc, almost faded into insignificance. Even as this
diverse bunch arrived at the bar, the turbot vending tray was returning laden
with big mugs of seacane rum. Janer glanced at Wade and raised an eyebrow.

‘Old Captains are always thirsty,’ Wade explained, having summoned the tray by
internal radio.

While the new arrivals gathered round them, only Keech held back.

‘My slot is nearly due,’ he announced. ‘I should say my goodbyes now.’

‘Then say them, lad,’ said Ambel. ‘Just give him to me.’

As Ambel grabbed Bloc’s shoulder, the man stared up at him, terrified. Erlin
considered what was in store for him: forensic examination and interrogation
by AI, then inevitably mindwipe. But perhaps Bloc somehow thought he would
escape that fate. However, there would be no such mercy if he remained here in
the hands of the Old Captains.

‘It’s been as interesting as ever.’ Keech shook hands all round. Then, eyeing
Janer and Erlin, ‘I will see you again, perhaps.’

Retrieving Bloc from Ambel’s firm grasp he slapped that Old Captain on the
shoulder. ‘Stay well, Ambel.’ Then he herded his prisoner off towards the
runcible embarkation lounge.

‘We should be moving as well.’ Wade stood up.

‘Yeah.’ Janer quickly rose too.

The vending tray, now empty, abruptly swooped in on them. When Janer looked
up, it was hovering only a metre in front of his face.

‘Janer Cord Anders,’ it announced, ‘you seem to have forgotten something.’

‘I beg your pardon?’

The tray opened two small laser ports situated on its underside.

‘You’re just no fun,’ grumbled Janer. He removed the singun from his jacket
and tossed it onto the tray. ‘Can we go now?’

The tray floated higher. ‘Of course.’

Janer said only brief goodbyes, until he came to Erlin.

‘Will you ever come back here?’ she asked him.

Grinning widely, he took hold of her chin and kissed her hard on the mouth.

‘Oh definitely,’ he said, and turned away.

Feeling slightly discomfited, Erlin watched them disappear after Keech and
Bloc. Ambel sat down beside her, studying her with some amusement, before both
turned their attention to Captain Ron, who was still standing, arms akimbo,

conversing with Captain Orbus.

‘Are you sure about this?’ he asked.

‘I’m sure,’ Orbus growled, then glanced at Drooble. ‘We’ve been on that ocean
too long. We’ve got to do something new.’

‘And can you?’ asked Ron.

Orbus looked directly at Erlin as he said, ‘The change, it twists you round.
Mostly that’s bad, but sometimes it twists you right.’ Feeling further
discomfiture, Erlin found she could not meet his gaze. Returning his attention
to Ron, he continued, ‘I’ve done some bad things in my life. But not any
more.’

Ron nodded contemplatively, then slowly removed a palm console from a
capacious pocket of his canvas trousers. He handed it to Orbus. ‘It’s all
there: the manifest and the contract with the owners. They’ve no pilots out
this way, so they’re glad to have you on board. Their only real requirement is
that you get the Gurnard back in one piece.’

Orbus accepted the console, grabbed Drooble by the shoulder and turned away,
heading for the spaceport airlocks.

‘How can Ron trust him?’ Erlin muttered to Ambel.

Ambel smiled. ‘We Captains, we’re old—we know how to judge people.’

‘Yes, I suppose.’

‘What about you? Are you staying or leaving?’ he asked.

‘I’ll stay—if you have the patience, and the time for me.’

‘I’ve got plenty of both,’ the Old Captain replied.

